I would guess that the world is going to get a lot more, like a lot funnier and like weirder.
If you think that something someone is doing is bad and they think it's really valuable,
most of the time in my experience, they're right and you're wrong. I am worried that we're just
removing all the friction between getting totally reward hacked by our technology.
We're trying to build a coding agent that advances llama research. I would guess that
like sometime in the next 12 to 18 months, we'll reach the point where like most of the code that's
going towards these efforts is written by AI. I tend to think that for at least the foreseeable
future, this is going to lead towards more demand for people doing work, not less. If you've gotten
the cost of providing that service down to one-tenth of what it would have otherwise been,
maybe now that actually makes sense to go do. All right, Mark, thanks for coming on the podcast
again. Yeah, happy to do it. Good to see you. You too. Last time you were here, you had launched
Llama 3. Yeah. Now you've launched Llama 4. Well, the first version. That's right. What's new? What's
exciting? What's changed? Oh, well, I mean, the whole field's so dynamic. So, I mean, I feel like
a ton has changed since the last time that we talked. Meta AI has almost a billion people using
it now monthly. So that's, that's pretty wild. And, you know, I think that this is going to be a
really big year on all of this because especially once you start getting the personalization loop
going, which we're just starting to build in now, really, from both the context that all the
algorithms have about what you're interested in feed and all your profile information, all the
social graph information, but also just what you're interacting with the AI about. I think that's just
going to be kind of the next thing that's going to be super exciting. So really big on that. The
modeling stuff continues to make really impressive advances too, as you know.
The Llama 4 stuff, I'm pretty happy with the first set of releases. You know, we announced
the, we announced four models and we released the first two, the Scout and Maverick ones,
which are kind of like the mid-sized models, mid-sized to small. It's not like, you know,
actually the most popular Llama 3 model was, was the, the 8 billion parameter model. So we're,
we've, we've, we've got one of those coming in the Llama 4 series too. Um, our internal code name for
it is Little Llama, but, um, but that, that's, that's, that's coming probably, you know, over the,
over the next, over the coming months. But the, um, the Scout and Maverick ones, um, and I mean,
they're good. They're, they're some of the highest intelligence per cost that you can get of any model
that's out there, natively multimodal, very efficient, run on one host, um, designed to just
be very efficient and low latency for a lot of the use cases that we're building for internally.
And, you know, that's our whole thing. We, we basically build what we're, what we want,
and then we open source it so other people can use it too. So I'm excited about that. Um,
I'm also excited about the behemoth model, which is, is coming up. Um, that's going to be
our first model that is, uh, sort of at the frontier. I mean, it's like more than 2 trillion
parameters. So it is, I mean, it's, you know, as, as the name says, it's, it's quite, quite big.
Um, so we're kind of trying to figure out how we make that useful for people. It's so big that
we've had to build a bunch of infrastructure, um, just to be able to post-train it ourselves.
And we're kind of trying to wrap our head around how does the, like the average developer out there,
how are they going to be able to use something like this and how do we make it so it can be useful?
for, um, distilling into models that are of reasonable size to run. Cause you're,
you're obviously not going to want to run, um, you know, something like that and a consumer model,
but, um, but yeah, I mean, it's, there, there's a lot to go. I mean, as you saw with the,
with the llama three stuff last year, the initial llama three launch was, um, was exciting. And then
we just kind of built on that over the year. 3.1 was when we released the four or 5 billion model.
3.2 is when we got all the multimodal stuff in. Um, so we basically have a roadmap like that for
this year too. So a lot going on. I'm interested to hear more about it. Uh,
there's this impression that the gap between the best closed source and the best open source models
has increased over the last year where I know the full family of llama four models is not yet,
but, um, llama four maverick is 35 on, uh, chatbot arena and then on a bunch of major benchmarks,
it seems like Oh, four mini or GP, a Gemini 2.5 flash are, um, beating maverick,
which is in the same class. What do you make of that impression?
Yeah. Well, okay. There, there's a few things. I actually think that this has been a very good
year for open source overall, right? If you go back to the, like where we were last year,
um, what we were doing with llama was like the only real, um, super innovative open source model.
Now you have a bunch of them in the field. And I think in general, the prediction that this would
be the year where open source, uh, generally overtakes closed sources, the most used model
models out there, um, I think is, is generally on track to be true. I think the thing that's been,
um, sort of a, an interesting surprise, I think positive in, in some ways negative in others,
but, but I think overall good is that it's not just llama. There, there are a lot of good ones
out there. Um, so I think that that's quite good. Um, then there's the reasoning phenomenon,
which, which you basically are, are alluding to with talking about 03 and 04 and, and, and some of
the other models. And I do think that there's this specialization that is, um, that's happening
where if you want a model that is sort of the best at math problems or coding or different things
like that. Um, I do think that these reasoning models with, um, a lot of, uh, the ability to
just consume more test time or inference time compute, um, in order to provide more intelligence
is a really compelling paradigm, but for a lot of the applications that, and we're going to do that
too, we're, we're building a llama for reasoning model and that that'll come out at some point.
Um, for a lot of the things that we care about, um, latency and good intelligence per cost are
actually much more important product attributes. Um, if you're, if you're primarily designing for,
you know, consumer product, uh, people don't necessarily want it to wait like half a minute
to go think through the answer. If you can provide an answer, that's generally quite good too.
In like half a second, then that's great. And that's a good trade-off. So I think that both
of these are going to end up being important directions. Um, I am optimistic about integrating
the reasoning models with, um, kind of the, the core language models over time. I think that's
sort of the direction that, um, Google has gone in with, um, with some of the more recent,
um, Gemini models. And I think that that that's really promising, but, um, but I think that there's
just going to be a bunch of different stuff that goes on. I mean, you also mentioned the whole,
um, chatbot arena thing, which I think is interesting. And it goes to this challenge
around how do you do the benchmarking, right? And, and basically how do you know what models
are good for which things? And one of the things that we've generally tried to do over the last year
is anchor more of our models in, um, our meta AI product Northstar use cases, because the issue with
both kind of open source benchmarks and, you know, any given thing like, like the, um, LM arena stuff
is it's just, it's, they're often skewed for a, uh, either a very specific, um, set of use cases,
which are often not actually what any normal person does in your product. Um, they are often
weighted, um, kind of the portfolio of things that they're trying to measure is different,
uh, from what people care about in any given pro product. And, um, because of that, we've found
that trying to optimize too much for that stuff is often, um, led us astray and actually not led
towards the highest quality products and the most usage and best feedback within meta AI as people
use our stuff. So we're trying to anchor our Northstar in, um, in basically the product value
that, that people, um, kind of report to us and what they say that they want and what their revealed
preferences are and using, um, the experiences that, that, that we have. So sometimes I think,
um, sometimes these things don't quite line up. And, and I think that a lot of them are, are quite
easily, um, gameable, right? So, I mean, I, I think on, on the, um, arena, you'll see stuff like,
uh, like Sonnet 3-7, it's like a great model, right? And it's, it's like not near the top.
Um, and it was relatively easy for our team to tune a version of Llama 4 Maverick, um, that basically
was way at the top. Um, whereas the one that we released, that's the, the kind of the pure model
actually has no tuning for that at all. So it, so it's further down. So I, I think you just need to be
careful with, with, with some of the benchmarks and, and we're gonna, we're gonna index primarily
on the products. Is, do you feel like there is some benchmark which captures what you see as a
North star of value to the user, which can be sort of objectively measured between the different
models? And you're like, I, I, I need Llama 4 to come out on top on this. Well, I mean, our benchmark
is basically, um, user value in meta AI, right? So it's, it's not compare other models. Um, well,
we might be able to, because we might be able to run other models in that and, and be able
to tell. And I think that that's one of the advantages of open source is basically you
have a good community of folks who can like poke holes that, okay, where is your model?
Not, not good. And where, where is it good? Um, but I think the reality at this point is
that all of these models are optimized for slightly different mixes of things. I mean, everyone
is trying to, I think, go towards the same, um, you know, I think all the leading labs are
trying to create general intelligence, right. And, um, super intelligence, whatever you call
it, right. Like basically AI that can lead towards a world of abundance where like everyone has
these superhuman tools to create whatever they want. And that leads to just dramatically empowering
people and creating all these economic benefits. I think that that's sort of, however you define
that, I think that that's kind of what, what a lot of the labs are going for. And, um, but there's
no doubt that different folks have sort of optimized towards different things. I think the
philanthropic folks have really focused on kind of coding and, and agents around that, you
know, the open AI folks, I think have gone a little more towards reasoning, um, recently.
And I think that there is a space, which if I had to guess, I think will end up probably
being the most used one, which, um, which is quick, is very natural to interact with, um,
is very natively multimodal, um, that fits into kind of throughout your day, the ways that you want
to interact with it. Um, and I think you got a chance to play around with, um, with, uh, the new
meta AI app that we're, that we're releasing. And, you know, one of the fun things that we put in
there is the, um, the demo for the full duplex voice. And it's, I mean, it's early, right. I mean,
it's not, um, you know, there was a reason why we haven't made that the default voice model in the
app, but there's something about how naturally conversational it is that I think is just like
really fun and compelling. And, and I think being able to mix kind of that in, um, with the right
personalization is going to lead towards a product experience where, you know, I, I would basically
just guess that you go forward a few years, like we're just going to be talking to AI throughout
the day about different things that we're wondering. And, um, you know, it's like, you'll,
um, you'll, you'll have your phone, you'll talk, you'll talk to on your phone, you'll talk to it
while you're browsing your feed apps. It'll give you context about different stuff. You'll be able
to answer questions. It'll help you as you're interacting with people and messaging apps.
Um, you know, eventually I think we'll, we'll walk through our daily lives and we'll either have
glasses or, um, you know, other kinds of AI devices and just be able to kind of seamlessly
interact with it all day long. So I think that that is, that's kind of the North star and whatever
the benchmarks are that lead towards people feeling like the, the quality is like, that's what they
want to interact with. That I think is actually the thing that is ultimately going to matter the
most to us. Hmm. I got a chance to play around with both Orion and also the media app and the voice
mode was super smooth. That was quite impressive. I, on the point of what the different labs are
optimizing for to steel men, their view, I think a lot of them think that once you fully automate
software engineering and AI research, then you can kick off an intelligence explosion where you
have millions of copies of these software engineers replicating the research that happened between
Lama one and Lama four, that scale of improvement again, in a matter of weeks or months rather than
years. Um, and so it really matters to just have close the loop on the software engineer and then you
can be the first to ASI. What do you make of that? Well, I mean, I personally think that's pretty
compelling. Um, and, and that's why we have a big coding effort too. I mean, we're working on,
um, a number of coding agents inside meta, um, you know, because we're not really a, um, an
enterprise software company, we're primarily building it for ourselves. So we're, so again,
you know, we, we go kind of like for, for, um, you know, the specific goal, we're not trying to build
a general developer tool. We're trying to build a coding agent and an AI research agent that, um,
that basically advances Lama research specifically. And, um, and it's like just fully kind of plugged
into our tool chain and all this. So I think that that's important. And, um, and I think is going
to end up being an important part of how this stuff gets done. I would guess that like sometime in the
next 12 to 18 months, um, we'll reach the point where like most of the code that's going towards
these efforts is written by AI. And I don't mean like autocomplete. I mean, right today you have,
like, you have kind of, you know, good autocomplete, like you start writing something
and it can complete the, the kind of section of code. I I'm talking more like you give it a goal,
it can run tests, right? It can, it can kind of improve things. Um, it can find issues. Um,
it writes higher quality code than like the, the average, very good person on, on the team already.
Um, and, and like, I think that that's going to be a really important part of this for sure,
but I don't know if that's the whole game. I mean, I think that that's, that I think is going to be a
big industry. Um, and I think that that's going to be, um, an important part of how AI gets developed,
but I think that there are still guys, I think, I mean, look, I guess one, one way to think about this
is this is a massive space, right? So I don't think that there's just going to be like one company
with one optimization function that serves everyone as best as possible. I think that there are a bunch
of different labs that are going to be doing leading work towards different domains. Some are
going to be more kind of enterprise focused or coding focused. Some are going to be, um, more
productivity focused. Some are going to be more social or entertainment focused, um, within the
assistant space. I think there are going to be some that are much more kind of informational or
productivity. Some are going to be more companion focused. Um, it's going to be a lot of the stuff
that's just like fun and entertaining and like shows up in your feed. Um, and I think that that's,
so I think that there's just like a huge amount of space. And part of what's fun about this is like,
it's like going towards this AGI future. There are a bunch of common threads for what needs to get
invented, but there are a lot of things at the end of the day that need to get created. And I think
that that's, um, I think you'll start to see a little more specialization between the groups,
if I had to guess. It's really interesting to me that you basically agree with the premise that
there will be an intelligence explosion and something like super intelligence on the other
end. But then if that's the case, tell me if I'm misunderstanding you, if that's the case,
why even bother with personal assistance and whatever? Why not just get, get to super
human intelligence first and then deal with everything else later? Well, I think that that's
just one aspect of the flywheel, right? So part of what, what I generally disagree with on the fast
takeoff thing is it takes time to build out physical infrastructure, right? So if you want
to build like a gigawatt cluster of compute, that just is going to take some time, right? It like
takes NVIDIA a bunch of time to like stabilize their new generation of, of, of the systems. And
then you need to figure out the networking around it. And then you need to like build the building and
you need to get permitting and you need to get the energy. And then like, okay, you want like some,
whether it's gas turbines or, um, or green energy, you need to like, there's a whole supply chain of
that stuff. So I think that there's like a lot of, and we talked about this a bunch on the last time
that I was, that it was on the podcast with you. And I think some of these are just like physical
world, human time things that as you start getting more intelligence in one part of the stack,
um, you'll basically just run into a different set of bottlenecks. I mean, that's sort of the way
that engineering always works. It's like you solve one bottleneck, you get another bottleneck.
Yeah. Um, another bottleneck in the system or another ingredient that's going to make this
like work well is basically people getting used to and learning and having a, a feedback loop with,
um, with using the system. So I don't think like, like these systems don't tend to be the type of
thing where like something just shows up fully formed and then people magically fully know how
to use it. Um, and that's the end. I think that there is this co-evolution that happens where
people are learning how to best use these AI assistants on the same side, the AI assistants are
learning what those people care about and the developers of those AI assistants are able to
make the, the kind of AI assistants better. Um, and then you're also building up this base of
context. So now you wake up and you're like a year or two into it. And now the AI assistant can
reference things that you talked about a couple of years ago. And like, that's pretty cool,
but you couldn't do that. If it just, you just launched the perfect thing on day one,
there's no way that it could reference what you talked about two years ago if it didn't exist two
years ago. So, um, so I guess my view is like, there's this huge intelligence growth. There's a,
a very rapid curve on the uptake of people interacting with the AI assistants and like the learning
feedback and, and kind of data flywheel around that. Um, and then there is also the build out of
the supply chains and infrastructure and regulatory frameworks to enable the scaling of a lot of the
physical infrastructure. But I think at some level, all of those are going to be necessary
and not just the coding piece. Um, I guess one, one specific example of this that I think is
interesting. Actually, if, even if you go back a few years ago, we had a project on, I think it was
on our ads team to automate ranking experiments, right? That's like a pretty constrained environment.
It's not like write open-ended code. It's basically look at the whole history of the company, every
experiment that any engineer has ever done in the ad system and look at what worked, what didn't,
what the results of those were, and basically formulate new hypotheses for different tests that
we should run that could improve the performance of the ad system. And what we basically found was,
um, we were bottlenecked on compute to run tests, uh, based on the number of hypotheses. It turns out,
even with just the, the humans that we have right now, um, on the ads team, we already have more good
ideas to test than you actually have either kind of compute or really cohorts of people to test them with,
right? Cause I mean, even if you have like three and a half billion people using your products,
you still wouldn't want each, you know, each test needs to be statistically significant. So it needs
to have, you know, some number of whatever it is, hundreds of thousands or millions of people.
And, um, and it's, there are only, there's some, there's kind of only so much throughput that you can
get on testing through that. So we're already at the point, even with just like the people we have
that, um, that we already can't really test everything that we want. Um, so now just being
able to test more things is not necessarily going to be additive to that. We need to get to the point
where the average quality of the hypotheses that the AI is generating is better than what the, all the
things above the line that we're actually able to test that like sort of the best humans on the team have
been able to do before it'll even be marginally useful for it. So I think that there's like, it will get there.
We'll get there, I think pretty quickly, but, um, but it's not like, okay, cool. The thing can write
code. All of a sudden, everything is just improving massively. There, there are like these real world
constraints that, um, that, that basically it needs to first, it needs to be able to kind of do a
reasonable job. Then it needs to, um, be able to, you need to have the compute and the, the kind of
people to test. And, and then over time, as the quality creeps up, I don't know, are we here in
like five or 10 years? And it's like, no set of people can generate a hypothesis as good as the AI
system. I don't know, maybe, right. It's like, then I think in that world, obviously that's,
that's going to be how all the value is created, but, but that's not the first step.
Publicly available data is running out. So major AI labs like Meta, Google DeepMind, and OpenAI
all partner with Scale to push the boundaries of what's possible. Through Scale's Data Foundry,
major labs get access to high quality data to fuel post-training, including advanced reasoning
capabilities. Scale's research team, SEAL, is creating the foundations for integrating advanced AI
into society through practical AI safety frameworks and public leaderboards around safety and
alignment. Their latest leaderboards include Humanities Last Exam, Enigma Eval, Multi-Challenge,
and Vista, which test a range of capabilities from expert level reasoning to multimodal puzzle solving
to performance on multi-turn conversations. Scale also just released Scale Evaluation, which helps
diagnose model limitations. Leading frontier model developers rely on Scale evaluation to improve
the reasoning capabilities of their best models. If you're an AI researcher or engineer and you want
to learn more about how Scale's Data Foundry and Research Lab can help you go beyond the current
frontier of capabilities, go to scale.com slash thwarkash. So if you buy this view that this is where
intelligence is headed, the reason to be bullish on Meta is obviously that you have all this
distribution, which you can also use to learn more things that can be useful for training.
You mentioned the Meta AI app now has a billion active users.
Not the app. Not the app. The app is a standalone thing that we're just launching now.
I think it's fun for people who want to use it. It's a cool experience. We can talk about that.
We're kind of experimenting with some new ideas in there that I think are novel and worth talking
through. But I'm talking mostly about our apps. Meta AI is actually most used in WhatsApp.
Got it.
So it's in WhatsApp is mostly used outside of the U.S. We just passed like 100 million people in the U.S.,
but it's not the primary messaging system in the U.S., iMessage is. So I think people in the U.S.
probably tend to underestimate the Meta AI use somewhat. But it's also part of the reason why
the standalone app is going to be so important is the U.S. is, you know, for a lot of reasons,
one of the most important country. And, you know, the fact that WhatsApp is the main way
that people are using Meta AI and that's not the main messaging system in the U.S. means
that we need another way to kind of build a first-class experience that's in front of people.
And I guess to finish the question, the bearish case would be that if the future of AI is less
about just answering your questions and more so just being a virtual coworker, it's not clear how
Meta AI inside of WhatsApp gives you the relevant training data to make, you know, like a fully
autonomous programmer, remote worker. So, yeah, in that case, does it not matter that much who has more
distribution right now with LLMs?
Well, again, I just think that there are going to be different things, right? It's like if you were
sitting at the beginning of the kind of the development of the internet and it's like, well,
what's going to be the main internet thing? Is it going to be knowledge work or is it going to be
like massive consumer apps? It's like, I don't know, you get both, right? It's like you don't
have to choose one, right? And now the world is big and complicated and does one company build all
that stuff. I think normally the answer is no. But yeah, no, to your question, people do not code
in WhatsApp for the most part. And I don't foresee that that's going to be like that people starting
to write code in WhatsApp is going to be like a major, major use case. Although I do think that
people are going to ask AI to do a lot of things that result in the AI coding without them necessarily
knowing it. So that's a separate thing. But we do have a lot of people who are writing code
at Meta and they use Meta AI. We have this internal thing that we call MetaMate and basically in a
number of different coding and AI research agents that we're building around that. And that has
quite its own feedback loop and I think can get good for accelerating those efforts. But again,
I just think that there are going to be a bunch of things. I think AI is almost certainly going to
unlock this massive revolution in knowledge work and code. I also think it's going to
be kind of the next generation of search and how people get information and do more complex
information tasks. I also think it's going to be fun. I think people are going to use it to be
entertained. And, you know, a lot of the internet is like memes and humor, right? And we have this
like amazing technology at our fingertips and it is sort of amazing and kind of funny when you think
about it, how much of human energy just goes towards entertaining ourselves and design and
pushing culture forward and finding humorous ways to explain cultural phenomenon that we observe. And
I think that that's almost certainly going to be the case in the future, right? If you look at like
the evolution of things like Instagram and Facebook, if you go back 10, 15, 20 years ago,
it was like text. Then we all got phones with cameras. Most of the content became photos. Then
the mobile networks got good enough that you, you know, if you wanted to watch a video on your phone,
it wasn't just like buffering. So that got good. So over the last like 10 years, most of the content
has moved, you know, basically towards video at this point. Most of the time spent in Facebook and
Instagram is video. But like, I don't know, do you think in five years, we're just going to be like
sitting in our feet and consuming media that's video. It's like, no, it's going to be interactive,
right? It's like, you'll be scrolling through your feed and there will be content that is,
is basically, I don't know, maybe it looks like a reel to start, but then like you talk to it or
you interact with it and it talks back or it changes what it's doing, or you can jump into it
like a game and interact with it. And that's all going to be like AI, right? So, so I guess my point
is there's just all these different things. And, and I guess we're, we're, we're ambitious. So we're
working on a bunch of them. Um, but I don't think any one company is going to do all of it.
Okay. So on this point of AI generated content or AI interactions, already people have meaningful
relationships with AI therapists, AI friends, you know, maybe more. Um, and this is just going to
get more intense as these AIs become more unique and more personable, more intelligent, more
spontaneous and funny and so forth. How do we make sure people are going to have relationships with AIs?
How, how do we make sure that these are healthy relationships? Well, I think there are a lot of
questions that you only really can answer as you start seeing the behaviors. So probably the most
important upfront thing is just like ask that question and care about it at each step along the
way. But, but I think also being too prescriptive upfront and saying, we think these things are
not good, um, often cuts off value, right? Because I don't know, people use stuff that's valuable for them.
I mean, one of my core guiding principles in designing products is like, people are smart,
right? They know what is valuable in their lives. Um, you know, every once in a while, um, you know,
something can, something bad happens in a product and you want to make sure that you design your products
well, um, to, to minimize that. But, but if, if, if you think that something someone is doing is bad
and they think it's really valuable, most of the time in my experience, they're right and you're wrong
and you just haven't come up with the framework yet for understanding why the thing that you're doing
is, is valuable and helpful in their life. Um, yeah. So, so that's kind of the main way that, that I,
that I think about it. I do think that people are going to use, um, AI for a lot of these social tasks.
Already one of the main things that we see people using that AI for is kind of talking through
difficult conversations that they need to have with, um, with people in their life. It's like,
okay, my, you know, my, my, uh, I'm having this issue with my girlfriend or whatever, like,
help me have this conversation or like, I need to have this hard conversation with my boss at work.
Like, how do I have that conversation? Um, that's pretty helpful. And then I think as the
personalization loop kicks in and the AI just starts to get to know you better and better,
um, I think that will just be really compelling. Um, you know, one thing just from working on social
media for a long time is, um, there's the stat that I always think is crazy. The, the average
American I think has, I think it's fewer than three friends, three people that they'd consider friends.
And, and the average person has demand for meaningfully more. I think it's like 15 friends
or something, right? I guess there's probably some point where you're like, all right, I'm just too
busy. I can't deal with more people, but, but the average person wants more connectivity
connection than they have. Um, so, you know, there's a lot of questions that people ask of stuff like,
okay, is this going to replace kind of in-person connections or real life connections? And
my default is that the answer to that is probably no. I think it, it, it, you know, I think that there
are all these things that are better about kind of physical connections when you can have them.
But the reality is that people just don't have the connection and they feel more alone, um, a lot
of the time than they would like. So I think that a lot of these things that today there might be a
little bit of a stigma around, um, I would guess that over time we will find the vocabulary as a
society to be able to articulate why that is valuable and why the people who are doing these
things are like, why they are rational for doing it and like, and how it is adding value for their,
for their lives. But, but also I think that the field is very early. So, um, I mean, it's like,
I, I think, you know, there are a handful of companies and stuff we're doing virtual therapist.
And, you know, there's like virtual girlfriend type stuff, but it's, um, it's very early,
right? It's, I mean, the, the embodiment in the things is, is pretty weak. A lot of them, like you,
you open it up and it's just like a, an image of, of like, of the therapist or the person you're
talking to or whatever. I mean, sometimes there's some very rough animation, but it's not like
an embodiment. I mean, you've seen the stuff that we're working on in reality labs where like
you have the codec avatars and it like feels like it's a real person. I think
that's kind of where it's going. You're gonna, you know, you'll, you'll be able to, um, basically
have like an always on video chat where it's like, oh, and also the, the, the, um, the, uh,
the AI will be able to, you know, the gestures are important too. Like more than half of
communication when you're actually having a conversation is not the words that you speak.
It's all the nonverbal stuff. Yeah. I, I did get a chance to check out, um, Orion the other day
and I thought it was super impressive. And I'm mostly optimistic about the technology just because
generally I'm, as you, as you mentioned, like libertarian about if people are doing something,
probably they think it's good for them. Although I actually don't know if it's the case that if
somebody is using TikTok, they would say that they're happy with how much time they're spending
on TikTok or something. So I'm mostly optimistic about it also in the sense that if we're gonna
be living in this future world of AGI, we need to be in order to keep up with that humans need to
be upgrading our capabilities as well with tools like this. Um, and just generally there can be more
beauty in the world if you can see studio Ghibli everywhere or something. I was worried that one of the
flagship use cases that your, your team showed me was I'm sitting at the breakfast table and on
the periphery of my vision is just a bunch of reels that are scrolling by. Um, maybe in the future,
my AI girlfriend is on the other side of the screen or something. Um, and so I, I am worried that
we're just removing all the friction between getting totally reward hacked by our technology.
Um, yeah, how do we make sure like, I don't know, this is not what ends up happening in five years.
I mean, again, I think, I think people have, have a good sense of what they want. I mean,
that, that experience that you saw was, that was a demo just to show multitasking and holograms.
Right. So I, I mean, I, I, I agree that like, I don't think that the, the future is like you have
stuff that's trying to compete for your attention in the corner of your vision all the time. I don't
think people would like that too much. Um, so it's actually, it's one of the things as we're designing
these glasses that we're really mindful of is like probably the number one thing that glasses need
to do is get out of the way and be good glasses. Right. And, um, as an aside, I think that's part
of the reason why the Ray-Ban meta product has done so well is like, all right, it's like great
for listening to music and taking phone calls and taking photos and videos. And the AI is there when you
want it, but when you don't, it's like a great, you know, good looking pair of glasses that, that,
that, that people like, and it kind of gets out of the way. Well, um, I would guess that that's going
to be a very important design principle for, for the, um, the augmented reality future. Right.
The main thing that I, that I see here is, you know, I think it's kind of crazy that for how
important the digital world is in all of our lives, the only way we can access it is through
these like physical, you know, digital screens, right? It's like, you, you have like a phone,
you have your, your, your computer, you can put a big TV. It's like this huge physical thing.
Um, it just seems like we're at the point with technology where the physical and the digital
worlds should really be fully blended. And that's what the holographic overlay is allow you to do.
Um, but I agree. I think a big part of the design principles around that are going to be okay. You'll,
you'll be interacting with, with people and you'll be able to bring digital artifacts into those
interactions and be able to do cool things like very seamlessly. Right. It's like, if I want to show
you something here, like here's a screen. Okay. Here it is. I could show you can interact with it. It can be
3d. Um, we can kind of play with it. Um, you want to, you know, like play a card game or whatever.
It's like, all right, here's like a deck of cards where we can play with it. It's like two of us are
here physically. Like you have a, a third friend who's just hologramming in, right. And they can,
they can kind of participate too. Um, but, but I think that in that world, people are going to be,
you know, just like, you don't want your physical space to be cluttered. It's sort of like, uh,
you know, it, it just kind of has like a, it wears on you psychologically. I don't think people are
going to want the digital kind of physical space to, to feel that way either. So I don't know that,
that's more of an aesthetic and, and, and, and one of these norms that I think we'll have to get
worked out. But, um, but I, I, I think, I think we'll figure that out.
Mm. Going back to the AI conversation, you're mentioning how big a bottleneck, um, the physical
infrastructure can be related to other open source models like DeepSeq and so forth.
DeepSeq right now has less compute, uh, than a lab like Meta. And you could argue that it's
competitive with the Lama models. Um, if China is better at, you know, physical infrastructure,
industrial scale ups, um, getting more power and more data centers online, how worried are you that
this will, they might beat us here? I mean, I think it's a, it's like a real competition.
Yeah. I mean, I think that you're seeing the, the industrial policies really play out, um,
where, yeah, I mean, I think China's bringing online more power and because of that, I think
that the U S really needs to focus on streamlining the ability to build data centers and build and
produce energy. Um, or I think we will be at a significant disadvantage. Um, at the same time,
I think some of the export controls on things like chips, I think you can see how they're clearly
working in a way because, you know, there was all the conversation with DeepSeq about,
oh, they did all these like very impressive low level optimizations. And the reality is
they did, and that is impressive. But then you ask, why did they have to do that when none of the
like American labs did it? And it's like, well, because they're using like partially nerfed chips
that are the only thing that Nvidia is allowed to sell in China because of the S export controls.
So, so DeepSeq basically had to go spend a bunch of their calories in time doing low level
infrastructure optimizations that the American labs didn't have to do. Now they produced a good result
on text, right? It's like, I mean, DeepSeq is text only. Um, so the infrastructure is impressive.
The text result is, is impressive. Um, but every new major model that comes out now is multimodal,
right? It's image, um, it's voice and, and, and, and there's, isn't. And now the question is,
why is that the case? I don't think it's because they're not capable of doing it. I think that they
basically had to spend their calories on doing these infrastructure optimizations to overcome
the fact that there were these export controls. Um, but when you compare like Llama 4 with DeepSeq,
I mean, our reasoning model isn't out yet. So I think that the, the kind of R1 comparison isn't,
isn't, isn't clear yet, but, um, but we're basically like, uh, effectively same ballpark on all the tech
stuff is what DeepSeq is doing, but with a smaller model. So it's, it's much more kind of efficient
per, um, the, the kind of cost per intelligence is lower with what we're doing for Llama
on text. And then all the multimodal stuff we're effectively leading at,
and it just doesn't even exist in their stuff. So, um, so I think that the Llama 4 models,
when you compare them to what they're doing are, are good. And, and I think generally people are
going to prefer to use the Llama 4 models. Um, but I think that there is this interesting contour
where like, it's clearly a good team that's doing stuff over there. And I think you're right to ask
about the, um, accessibility of power, the accessibility of compute and chips and things
like that. Um, because I think the, the kind of work that you're seeing the different labs do and play
out, I think is somewhat downstream of that. Freemium products attract a ton of fake account signups,
bot traffic and free tier abuse. And AI is so good now that it's basically useless to just have a captcha
of six squiggly numbers on your signup page. Take cursor. People were going to insane links to take
advantage of cursor's free credits, creating and deleting thousands of accounts, sharing logins,
even coordinating through Reddit. And all of this was costing cursor a ton of money in terms of
inference compute and LLM API calls. Then they plugged in WorkOS Radar. Radar distinguishes humans
from bots. It looks at over 80 different signals from your IP address to your browser, to even the
fonts installed on your computer to ensure that only real users can get through. Radar currently
runs millions of checks per week. And when you plug Radar into your own product, you immediately
benefit from the millions of training examples that Radar has already seen through other top companies.
Previously, building this level of advanced protection in-house was only possible for huge
companies. But now with WorkOS Radar, advanced security is just an API call away. Learn more at
WorkOS.com slash Radar. All right, back to Zuck.
ZUCK BAKER- So Sam Altman recently tweeted that OpenAI is going to release an open-source
SODA reasoning model. I think part of the tweet was that we will not do anything silly like
say that you can only use it if you have less than 700 million users. DeepSeq has the MIT license,
whereas Lama, I think a couple of the contingencies in the Lama license require you to say built with
Lama on applications using it, or any model that you train using Lama has to begin with the word Lama.
Yeah. What do you think about the license? Should it be less onerous for developers?
I mean, look, I mean, we've basically pioneered like the open source LLM thing. So I mean,
I don't consider the license to be onerous. I kind of, you know, think that when we were starting to
push on open source, it was this big debate in the industry of like, is this even a reasonable thing
to do? Like, can you do something that is safe and trustworthy with open source? Like is, will open
source ever be able to be competitive enough that anyone will even care? And basically when we were
answering those questions, which, you know, a lot of the hard work that, you know, I think a lot of the
teams at Meta, although there are other folks in the industry, but really the Lama models were the ones
that I think broke open this whole open source AI thing in a huge way.
You know, we were very focused on, okay, if we're going to put all this energy into it,
then at a minimum, you know, if you're going to have these large cloud companies like Microsoft
and Amazon and Google turn around and sell our model, that we should at least be able to have
a conversation with them before they do that around basically like, okay, what kind of business
arrangement should we have? But our goal with the license isn't, you know, we're generally not
trying to stop people from using the model. We just think like, okay, if you're like one of those
companies or if you're Apple, you know, just come talk to us about what you want to do and let's find
like a productive way to do it together. So I think that that's generally been fine. Now, if the whole open
source part of the industry evolves in a direction where, you know, there's like a lot of other great
options and if like the, you know, the license ends up being a reason why people don't want to use Lama,
then I don't know, we'll have to reevaluate the strategy, whether, you know, what it makes sense
to do at that point. But I just don't think we're there. That's not in practice a thing that we've seen
companies coming to us and saying, we don't want to use this because your license says that if you're,
if you reach 700 million people, you have to come talk to us. So it's at least so far,
it's a little bit more of something that we've heard from like, kind of open source purists,
like, is this as clean of an open source model as you'd like it to be? And look, I mean, I think
that debate has existed since the beginning of open source with like, um, you know, the,
you know, just all the GPL license stuff versus other things. And it's like, okay, just like,
does it need to be the case that anything that touches open source can has to, has to be open
source or can people just take it and use it in different ways? And I'm sure there will continue
being debates around this, but I don't know if you're, if you're spending many, many billions of
dollars training these models, I think asking the other companies that, um, are also huge and similar
in size and can easily kind of afford to have a relationship with us to talk to us before they use
it. I think it seems like a pretty reasonable thing. If it turns out that you, you know, other
models are also, you know, there's like a bunch of good open source models. So that part of your
mission is fulfilled and maybe other models are better at coding. Is there a world where you just say,
look, open source system ecosystem is healthy. There's plenty of competition. We're happy to
just use some other model, whether it's for internal, um, software engineering at Meta or
deploying to our apps. We don't necessarily need to build with Llama. Um, well, again, I mean,
we do a lot of things, so it's possible that, you know, I guess let's take a step back. The reason
why we're building our own big models is because we want to be able to like build exactly what we want,
right? And, and none of the other models in the world are sort of exactly what we want. If they're
open source, then you can take them and you can fine tune them in different ways, but you still
have to deal with the model architectures and, you know, they make different size trade-offs around,
um, that affect the latency and inference cost of the models. And it's like, okay, the scale that we
operate at, um, that stuff really matters. Like we made the Llama Scout and Maverick models certain
sizes for a specific reason because they fit on a host and we wanted certain latency,
especially for the voice models that we're, that we're working on that we want to just basically
have pervade and be across everything that we're doing from the glasses to all of our apps, to the
Meta AI app and all this stuff. So, um, so I think that there's a level of kind of control of your own
destiny that you only get when you, when you build the stuff yourself. That said, there are a lot of things
that like AI is going to be used in every single thing that every company does. When we build a big
model, we also need to choose which things, which use cases internally we're going to optimize for.
So does that mean that for certain things we're not going to, you know, think that like, okay,
maybe Claude is better for building this specific development tool that this team is using. All right,
cool. Then like use that. Fine. Great. Um, I don't think we don't want to fight with, you know,
one hand tied behind our back. Um, we're, we're doing a lot of different stuff. Um, you also asked,
would we maybe, would it not be important because other people are doing open source?
Um, I don't know on this, I'm a little more worried because I think you have to ask
for anyone who shows up now and is doing open source. Now that we have done it,
there's a question, which is, would they still be doing open source if we weren't doing it? And
like, I think that there are a handful of folks who see the trend that more and more development is
going towards, um, towards open source. And they're like, oh crap, like we kind of need to
be on this train or else we're going to lose. Like we have some closed model API
and like increasingly a lot of developers, that's not what they want. Um, so, so I think you're seeing
a bunch of the other players start to do some work in open source, but it's just unclear if it's
dabbling or fundamental for them in the way that it has been for us. And you know, a good example
is like what's going on with like Android, right? It's like Android started off as the open source
thing. There's not really like any open source alternative. Like I think over time, Android has
just been kind of getting more and more closed. Um, so I think if you're us, you'd kind of need to worry
that if we stopped pushing the industry in this direction, that like all these other people,
maybe you're only really doing it because they're trying to kind of compete with us
in the direction that we're pushing things. And you know, they've, they already have their revealed
preference for what they would build if open source didn't exist. And, um, and it wasn't open source,
right? So, um, so I, I just think we need to be careful about relying on that continued behavior
for the future of the technology that we're going to build at the company.
I mean, another thing I've heard you mention is that it's important that the standard gets built
around American models like Llama. Um, I guess I wanted to understand your logic there because
it seems like with certain kinds of networks, it is the case that the Apple App Store just has a big
contingency around what it's built around. Um, but it doesn't seem like, you know, you, you, if you
build some sort of scaffold for DeepSeek, you couldn't have easily just switched it over to
Llama 4, especially since between generations, like Llama 3 wasn't MOE, Llama 4 is. So things are
changing between generations of models as well. So what's the reason for thinking things will get
built out in this contingent way on a specific standard?
I'm not sure. What do you mean by contingent?
Oh, as in like, it's important that people are building for Llama rather than for LLMs in general,
because that will determine what the standard is for the future.
Sure. Well, look, I mean, I think these models encode values and ways of thinking about the world.
Mm-hmm. And you know, we had this interesting experience early on where we took an early
version of Llama and we translated it. I think it was, it might've been into French or some other
language. And the feedback that we got, um, I think it was, I think it was French from, from French
people was this sounds like an American who learned to speak French. Like it doesn't sound like a French
person. It's like, well, what do you mean? Does it not speak French well? It's like, no, it speaks French
fine. It's just like the way that it thinks about the world is like, seems slightly American.
So I feel that there's like these subtle things that kind of get built into it.
Um, over time, as the models get more sophisticated, they should be able to embody
different value sets across the world. So maybe that's like a very kind of, um,
you know, not particularly sophisticated example, but I think it sort of illustrates the point.
Um, and you know, some of the stuff that we've seen in testing some of the models, especially
coming out of China is like, they sort of have certain values encoded in them. And, um, and it's
not just like a light fine tune to get that to feel the way that you want. Now the stuff is different,
right? So I think language models, um, or something that has like a kind of like a world model embedded
into it, have more values reasoning, I think is, I mean, I guess there are kind of values or ways to
think about reasoning, but one of the things that's nice about the reasoning models is they're trained
on verifiable problems. So do you need to be worried about like cultural bias? If your model is doing
math, probably not. Right. I think that that's, you know, I think it's like the, the chance that like
some reasoning model that was built elsewhere is like going to kind of incept you by like solving a
math problem in a way that's, that's, um, devious seems low. Um, there's a whole set of different
issues. I think around coding, um, which is the other verifiable domain, which is, you know, I think
you, you kind of need to be worried about like waking up one day and like, does a model that have some tie
to another government, like can it embed all kinds of different vulnerabilities and code that then
like the intelligence organizations associated with that government can then go exploit. So now
you sort of like, all right, like in some future version where you have, you know, some model from
some other country that we're using to like secure or build out a lot of our systems. And then all of
a sudden you wake up and it's like, everything is just vulnerable to, um, in a way that like that
country knows about, but, but like you don't, or, or it turns on a vulnerability at some point,
those are real issues. Um, so what we've basically found is, um, no, I mean, I'm, I'm very interested
in studying this because I think one of the main things that's interesting about open source
is the ability to distill models. Um, you know, most people, the, the primary value isn't just
like taking a model off the shelf and saying like, okay, like meta build this version of llama. I'm
going to take it and I'm going to run it exactly in my application. It's like, no, well, your
application isn't doing anything different. If you're just running our thing, you're at least
going to fine tune it or try to distill it into a different model. And when we get to stuff like
the behemoth model, like the whole value in that is being able to basically take this very high
amount of intelligence and distill it down into a smaller model that you're actually going to run.
But this is like the beauty of distillation. And it's like, one of the things that I think has
really emerged as a very powerful technique in the last year, since the last time we sat down,
is, um, and I think it's worked better than most people would predict as you can basically take
a model that is much bigger and take probably like 90 or 95% of its intelligence and run it in
something that's 10% the size. Now, do you get a hundred percent of the intelligence? No,
but like 95% of the intelligence at 10% of the cost is like pretty good for, for a lot of things.
Um, the other thing that's interesting is now with this like more varied open source community where
you, it's not just Llama, you have other models, you have the ability to distill from multiple sources.
So now you can basically say, okay, Llama is really good at this. Like maybe the architecture
is really good because it's fundamentally multimodal and fundamentally more, um, inference
friendly and more efficient. But like, let's say this other model is better at coding. Okay. Well,
just, you can distill from both of them and then build something that's better than either of them
for your own use case. Um, so that's cool, but you do need to solve the security problem of knowing
that you can distill it in a way that is safe and secure. And so this is something that we've been
researching and have put a lot of time into. And what we've basically come to is like, look,
anything that's kind of like language is, is quite fraught because there's like a lot of values
embedded in that. So unless you don't care about having the values from whatever the model is
that you got, you probably don't want to like distill the straight like language world model.
Um, on reasoning, I think you can get a lot of the way there by limiting it to verifiable domains,
running, um, kind of code cleanliness and security filters. Like, like whether it's like the LamaGuard
open source or the code shield, open source things that we've done that basically, um, allow you to
incorporate different, different, um, input into your models and make sure that the, that both the
input and the output, um, are secure. And then just a lot of red teaming to make sure that you're,
you're, um, like you, you just have people who are experts who are looking at this. It's like,
all right, is this model doing anything that isn't what I want after distilling from something? And
I think with a combination of those techniques, you can probably distill on the reasoning side for
verifiable domains quite securely. Um, that's something I'm pretty confident about. And it's
something that, that we've done a lot of research around, but I think this is a very big question
is like, how do you do good distillation? Because there's just so much value to be unlocked. But at the
same time, I do just think that there is some fundamental bias in the different models.
Speaking of value to be unlocked, what do you think the right way to monetize AI will be?
Because obviously digital ads are quite lucrative, but as a fraction of total GDP,
it's small in comparison to like all remote work. Um, uh, like even if you can increase
its productivity and not replace, uh, work that's still worth tens of trillions of dollars.
So is it possible that ads might not be it or yeah, how do you think about this?
I mean, like we were talking about before, there's going to be all these different applications
and different applications tend towards different things. Um, ads is great when you want to offer
people a free service, right? Because it's free. You need to cover it somehow. Yeah.
Ads is like, okay, it's ads solves this problem of like a person does not need to pay for something
and they can get something that is like amazing for free. Um, and also by the way,
with modern ad systems, a lot of the time people think that the ads add value to the thing if you do
it well, right? It's, um, you know, you need to be good at ranking and, and you need to be good at
having enough liquidity of advertising inventory. Um, so that way, you know, if you only have five
advertisers in the system, no matter how good you are at ranking, you may not be able to show
something to someone that they're interested in. But if you have a million advertisers in the system,
then you're probably going to be able to find something pretty compelling if you're good at
at picking out, you know, the different needles in the haystack that that person's going to be
interested in. So I think that definitely has its place, but there are also clearly going to be
other business models as well, including ones that, um, just have higher costs. So it doesn't
even make sense to offer them for free. Um, which by the way, there have always been business models
like this. There's a reason why social media is free and ad supported, but then if you want to watch
Netflix, um, or like ESPN or something, you need to pay for that. It's okay. Cause the content that's
going into that, like they need to produce it and that's very expensive for them to produce.
And they probably could not have enough ads in the service in order to make up for the,
the cost of producing the content. So basically you just need to pay to, to access it. Um,
then the trade office, fewer people do it, right? It's like, they're talking about hundreds of millions
of people using those instead of billions. So it's, there's kind of a, a value switch there.
Um, I think similar here, you know, not everyone is going to want like a software engineer or a
thousand software engineering agents or whatever it is. But if you do, that's something that you're,
you are probably going to be willing to pay thousands or tens of thousands or hundreds of
thousands of dollars for. Um, so I, I think that this just speaks to the diversity of different
things that need to get created is like, they're going to be business models at each point along
the spectrum and it met a, um, yeah, for the consumer piece, we definitely want to have a
free thing and I'm sure that will end up being ad supported. But I also think we're going to want
to have a business model that supports people using arbitrary amounts of compute to do like really
even more amazing things than what it would make sense to be able to offer the free service.
And for that, I'm sure we'll end up having a premium service, but, but I mean,
I think our, our basic, you know, values on this are we want to serve as many people in the world.
Lambda is the cloud for AI developers. They have over 50,000 NVIDIA GPUs ready to go for startups,
enterprises, and hyper-sailers. Compute seems like a commodity though. So why use Lambda over
anybody else? Well, unlike other cloud providers, Lambda's only focus is AI. This means their GPU
instances and on-demand clusters have all the tools that AI developers need pre-installed. No need to
manually install CUDA drivers or manage Kubernetes. And if you only need GPU compute, you can save a ton
of money by not paying for the overhead of general purpose cloud architectures. Lambda even has contracts
that let enterprises use any type of GPU in their portfolio and easily upgrade to the next generation.
For all of you wanting to build with Llama 4, Lambda has a serverless API without rate limits. It's
built with rapid scaling in mind. Users have 1000X their inference consumption without ever having to
apply for a quota or even speak to a human. Head to lambda.ai.dwarkesh for a free trial of their
inference API featuring the best open source models like DeepSeq and Llama 4 at the lowest prices in the
industry. All right, back to Zoc. How do you keep track of, you've got all these different projects,
some of which we've talked about today. I'm sure there's many I don't even know about.
As the CEO overseeing everything, there's a big spectrum between like, you know, going to the Llama
team and here's the hyperparameters you should use to just giving like a mandate, like go make the AI
better. And there's many different projects. How do you think about the way in which you can best
deliver your value add and oversee all these things? Well, I mean, a lot of what I spend my time on is
trying to get awesome people onto the teams, right? I mean, it's, so there's that. And then
there's stuff that cuts across teams. It's like, all right, you build meta AI and you want to get it
into WhatsApp or Instagram. It's like, okay, then now I need to get those teams to talk together.
And then there's a bunch of questions like, okay, I was, you know, it's like, okay, do you want
the thread for meta AI and WhatsApp to feel like other WhatsApp threads,
or do you want it to feel like other kind of like AI chat experiences? There's like different idioms
for those. And so I think that there's like all these interesting questions that sort of need to
get answered around like, how does this stuff basically fit into all of what we're doing?
Then there's a whole other part of what we're doing, which is basically pushing on the infrastructure.
If you're, if you want to stand up a gigawatt cluster, then first of all, that has a lot of
implications for, for the way that we're doing infrastructure build outs. It has sort of
political implications for how you engage with the different states where you're building that stuff.
It has financial implications for the company in terms of, all right, there's like a lot of economic
uncertainty in the world. Do we like go double down on infrastructure right now? And, and if so,
what other trade-offs do we want to make around the company? Like those are things that like,
it's tough for other people to really make those kinds of decisions. And then, and then I think
that there's this question around like taste and quality, which is like, when is something good
enough that we want to ship it? And, and I do feel like in general, I'm the steward of that for the
company. Although, you know, we have a lot of other people I think have good taste as well, who are also
filters for, for different things. But, um, but yeah, I think that those are, those are basically
the areas, but I think, um, AI is interesting because more than some of the other stuff that we
do, it is more research and model led than really product led. Like you can't just like design the
product that you want and then try to build the model to fit into it. You really need to like design
the model first and like the capabilities that you want. And then you get some emergent properties,
then you can build some different stuff because this kind of turned out in this way. And I think
at the end of the day, like, like people want to use the best model, right? So that's partially why,
you know, when we're talking about building the most like personal AI, um, the best voice,
the best personalization, um, and like also a very smart experience with very low latency.
Those are the things that we basically need to design the whole system to build, which is why
we're working on full duplex voice, which is why we're working on like the personalization to both,
both have like good memory extraction from your interaction with AI, but also be able to plug into
all the other meta systems and why we design the, um, specific models that we designed to have the
kind of size and latency parameters that they do.
Hmm. Speaking of politics, um, there, there's been this perception that some tech leaders have
been aligning with Trump. You and others have donated to his inaugural event and we're on stage with him.
And I think you settled like a lawsuit, which gave, uh, resulted in them getting $25 million.
I wonder, um, what's going on here? Is it, does it, does it feel like the cost of doing business
with the administration or, you know, what's the best way to think about this?
My view on this is like, he's the president of the United States. Our default as an American
company should be to try to have a productive relationship with whoever is running the
government. Um, I would do this, you know, like we, we've tried to offer to support, um, previous
administrations as well. I've, I've been pretty public with some of my frustrations with the
previous administration, how they basically did not engage with us or the business community more
broadly, which I think, frankly, I think is going to be necessary to make progress on some of these
things. Like we're not going to be able to build the level of energy, um, that we need if they're,
if you don't have a dialogue and they're not prioritizing, trying to do those things. So, um,
but fundamentally, you know, look, I mean, I think a lot of people want to write the story about like,
like, you know, what direction are people going? Like, I just think it's like,
we're trying to build great stuff. We want to work with, have a productive relationship with people.
And that's sort of, that's, that's how I see it. And it is also how I would guess most others
see it. Um, but obviously I can't speak for them. Um, you've spoken out about how you've rethought some
of the ways in which you, um, engage and defer to the government in terms of moderation stuff in the past.
How, how are you thinking about AI governance? Because if AI is as powerful as we think it might
be, the government will want to get involved. What, what is like the most productive approach to take
there? And what, what should the government be thinking about here?
Yeah, I guess in the past, I, I probably just, um, I mean, most of the comments that I made,
I think were in the context of content moderation, right? Where, um, you know, it's been an interesting
journey over the last 10 years on this, where there, it's obviously been an interesting time in history.
There have been novel questions raised about online content moderation. Um,
some of those have led to, I think productive, um, new systems getting built like our AI systems to
be able to detect nation states trying to interfere in each other's elections. I think we will continue
building that stuff out. And that, that I think has been that positive, right? I think other stuff,
we went down some bad paths. Like I just think the fact checking thing was not as effective as
community notes because it's not an internet scale solution. There weren't enough fact checkers and
like people didn't trust the specific fact checkers. They like, you, you, you want a more robust system.
So I, I think what we got with community notes is the right one on that. But, um, but my point on this
was, was more that, um, that, I think historically I probably deferred a little bit too much to, um,
either the media in, in kind of their critiques or the government on things that they
did not really have authority over, but just as like a central figure. Um, like I, I, I think we tried to
build systems that were maybe we could not have to make all of the content moderation decisions
ourselves or something. And I, I guess I just think part of the, the growth process over the last
10 years is just, okay, like we're a meaningful company. We need to own the decisions that we need
to make. We should listen to feedback from people, but shouldn't defer too much to people who are not,
who do not actually have authority over this. Because at the end of the day, we're like, we're in the seat
and we need to like own the decisions that we make. And, um, so I think we probably, you know,
it's been, it's been a maturation process and, um, in some ways painful, but, but I, I, you know,
I think we're, we're probably a better company for it. Will tariffs increase the cost of building
data centers in the U S and shift build outs to Europe and Asia? It is really hard to know how that
plays out. Um, I think we're probably in the, the early innings on that and, um, it's very hard to know.
Got it. Um, what is your single highest leverage hour in a week? What are you doing in an hour?
I don't know. I mean, every week is a little bit different. Um, I mean, it's probably got
to be the case that the most leveraged thing that you do in a week is not the same thing each week,
or else by definition, you should probably spend more than one hour doing that thing every week.
Um, but yeah, I don't know. It's, it's part of the fun of, of, of, of both, I guess this job, but also
the industry being so dynamic is like things really move around. Right. And like, and the world
is very different now than it was at the beginning of the year than it was six months and into the
middle of last year. Um, and I think a lot has sort of, has really advanced meaningfully and like
a lot of cards have been turned over since the last time that we sat down. I think that was about a year
ago. Right. Yeah. Yeah. But I guess if you were saying earlier that recruiting people is
a super high leverage thing you do, it's very high leverage. Yeah. Yeah. What would be possible if,
you know, you've talked about these models being mid-level software engineers by the end of the
year, or, um, what would be possible if say software productivity increased like a hundred X in
two years, what kinds of things could be built that we can't build right now? What kinds of things?
Well, why it's, that's an interesting question. Um, I mean, I think one theme of this
conversation is that the like amount of creativity that's going to be unlocked is going to be massive.
Um, and if you look at like the overall arc of
kind of human society and the economy over a hundred or a hundred fifty years,
it's basically people going from being primarily agrarian and most of human energy going towards
just feeding ourselves to that has become a kind of smaller and smaller percent. And the things that
take care of like our basic physical needs are a smaller and smaller percent of human energy,
which has led to two impacts. One is more people are doing kind of creative and cultural pursuits.
And two is that more people, uh, the people in general spend less time working and more time
on entertainment and culture. Um, I think that that is almost certainly going to continue as,
as this goes on. This isn't like the one to two year thing of what happens when you have a,
like a super powerful software engineer. But I think over time, you know, if you like,
everyone is going to have these superhuman tools, um, to be able to create a ton of different stuff.
I think you're going to get this incredible diversity. Um, part of it is going to be solving
like things that we hold up as like these like hard problems, like solving diseases or like
solving different things around science or, um, or just like different technology that makes our lives
better. But I would guess that a lot of it is going to end up being kind of cultural and social
pursuit and entertainment. And like, I would guess that the world is going to get a lot more
like a lot funnier and like weirder and, and quirkier in a way that like the memes on the
internet have sort of gotten over the last 10 years. And, um, and I think that that adds a certain
kind of richness and depth as well that in kind of funny ways, I think it actually helps you connect
better with people because now, like, I don't know, it's like all day long. I just find interesting
stuff on the internet and like send it in group chats to the people I care about who I think are going to
find it funny. And it's like, like the, the media that people can produce today to express very,
very nuanced, specific cultural ideas. Um, I don't know. It's, it's, it's cool. And I think
that'll continue to get built out. And I think it does advance society in a bunch of ways, even if
it's not like the hard science way of curing a disease. Yeah. But I guess this is sort of,
if you think about it, like the, the like meta social media view of the world is like, yeah,
I think people are going to spend a lot more time doing that stuff in the future. Um, and, and it's
going to be a lot better and it's going to help you connect because it's like going to help express
different ideas. Um, because the world's going to get more complicated, but like our technology,
our cultural technology to kind of express these very complicated things, um, in like a very kind of
funny little clip or something, um, are going to just get so much better. So I know that's all great.
Um, I don't know next year for, uh, I tend to, I mean, just, I guess one other thought that I
think is interesting to cover is, um, I tend to think that it, for at least the foreseeable future,
this is going to lead towards more demand for people doing work, not less. Now people have a
choice of how much time they want to spend working. Um, but like, I'll give you one interesting
example of something that, that we were talking about recently. We, um, so we have like three,
almost three and a half billion people use our services every day. And one question that we've
struggled with forever is like, how do we provide customer support, right? Today, like you can,
you can write an email. Um, but we've never seriously been able to contemplate having,
um, you know, having like voice support where someone can just call in. And I guess that's
maybe one of the artifacts of having a free service, right? Is like the, the revenue per person's not
so high that you can have an economic model that people can, can kind of call in, but also with three
and a half billion people using your service every day, I mean, you, there'd be like a massive,
massive number of people, like some, like, like the biggest call center in the world type of thing.
Yeah. Um, but it would be like 10, 20 billion dollars,
something ridiculous a year to kind of staff that. So we, we've never really kind of like
thought too seriously about it. Cause it was always just like, no, there's no way that this
kind of makes sense. But now as the AI gets better, you're going to get to this place where the AI can
handle a bunch of people's issues, not all of them. Right. Cause, um, maybe 10 years from now or
something that can handle all of them. But when we're thinking about like a three to five year
time horizon, um, it'll be able to handle a bunch kind of like self-driving cars can handle a bunch
of terrain, but in general, they're not like doing the whole route by themselves yet in, in, in most
cases. Right. It's like people thought truck driving jobs were going to go away. There's actually more
truck driving jobs now than there were. Like when we started talking about self-driving cars,
you know, whatever it was almost 20 years ago. Um, and I think for going back to this customer
support thing, it's like, all right, it wouldn't make sense for us to staff out, um, calling for
everyone, but let's say the AI can handle 90% of that. Then like, and then if you, if, if it can't
handle it, then it kicks it off to a person. Okay. Now, like if you've gotten the cost of providing that
service down to one 10th of what it would have otherwise been then, all right, maybe now that
actually makes sense to go do, and that would be kind of cool. So the net result is like, I actually
think we're probably going to go hire more customer support people, right? It's like, like the, the
common knowledge or like the, the kind of common belief that people have is that like, oh, this is
clearly just going to automate jobs and like all these jobs are going to go away. I actually just,
that has not really been how the history of technology has worked. It's, it's been, you know, you,
you can, you like create things that take away 90% of the work and that leads you to want more
people, not less. Final question. Who is the one person in the world today who you most seek out for
advice? Oh man. Well, I feel like it's part of my style is I like having a breadth of advisors. So
it's, it's not just, it's not just one person, but it's, um, we've got a great team. I mean, it's, uh,
you know, I'm, I'm, I'm, I think that there's people at the company, people on our board. Um,
there's a lot of people in the industry who are doing new stuff. I, there's, there's not,
there's not like a single person. Um, but it's, uh, I know it's fun. And, and also as when the world
is dynamic, I'm just having a reason to work with people you like on cool stuff. I'm to me,
like, that's what life is about. Yep. All right. Great note to close on. Awesome. Thanks for doing
this. Yeah. Thank you. I hope you enjoyed this episode. If you did, the most helpful thing you
can do is just share it with other people who you think might enjoy it. Send it to your friends,
your group chats, Twitter, wherever else, just let the word go forth. Other than that, super helpful if
you can subscribe on YouTube and leave a five-star review on Apple Podcasts and Spotify. Check out the
sponsors in the description below. If you want to sponsor a future episode, go to dwarkesh.com
slash advertise. Thank you for tuning in. I'll see you on the next one.
