Process theology as, you know, it sort of initially articulated in that final part of process in reality has been of great personal consequence for me in allowing me to, without embarrassment, talk about the divine and use the G word in mixed company.
Because it's a vision of God that I think people of varying faiths can connect with, whether Asian traditions, Western traditions, Indigenous traditions, there's something there for everyone.
Welcome to Conversations in Process. You're in for a treat today, especially if you're interested in process philosophy and more specifically in the philosophy of YGIT, as I am.
I'm Jay McDaniel, and I had the good fortune to visit with Dr. Matthew Siegel.
Matthew Siegel is assistant professor at the California Institute for Integral Studies in San Francisco, where he teaches courses on German idealism and process philosophy for the Philosophy, Cosmology, and Consciousness program at CIIS.
He blogs regularly on an oft-viewed website called Footnotes to Plato, that's footnotestoplato.com, and is the author of a well-known book, Physics of the World's Soul, Whitehead's Adventure in Cosmology, published in 2019.
He's known to all of us in the process community as a key figure at the intersection of philosophy, spirituality, and science, and that's what we're going to talk about today.
And we'll focus in on Whitehead's thought and to learn from him on topics ranging from God, to experience, to quantum moments, to space-time continua, to Plotinus, to Indigenous traditions, to Buddhism, you name it.
Enjoy.
All right.
Matt, thanks for joining us.
Good to have you.
Good to be here with you, Jay.
And let's not beat around the bush.
Let's jump to the question at hand.
How in the world did you discover the philosophy of Whitehead?
What was the context?
So I discovered Whitehead actually listening to lectures by Terrence McKenna when I was an undergraduate.
And if you're not familiar with Terrence, he once walked into a room to meet Timothy Leary, and Timothy Leary said, oh, it's the real Tim Leary.
So he's sort of this autodidact, psychedelic philosopher who developed his own sort of cosmological vision.
And I was quite intrigued with his approach, you know, as a young person just getting into philosophy and discovering the seemingly infinite array of different states of consciousness through which one could experience oneself and the universe.
And so McKenna would bring up Whitehead's concept of concrescence as an example of a sort of new paradigm understanding of the nature of time and creativity.
And I was obviously quite intrigued.
And when I inquired further, asking some of my professors at the University of Central Florida where I got my undergrad degree, I asked them about Whitehead.
And they said, oh, yeah, he's just really hard to read.
And, you know, I don't even know where to tell you to start.
And so I waited until graduate school to really dig into his primary texts and began studying him in my first year at CIIS in the master's program, Philosophy, Cosmology and Consciousness, in which I now teach.
And I studied with Eric Weiss, who passed away last year.
And Eric introduced me to Whitehead in the context of a course that was comparing Whitehead's cosmology with that of Sri Aurobindo and the integral yoga of Sri Aurobindo.
So Whitehead's already quite an elevated thinker in his own right.
But when brought into the dialogue with Aurobindo, you really get an expansive view of the evolution of consciousness and its place in a living, dynamic, divinely infused cosmos.
So I've been studying Whitehead directly since 2008.
So I've only continued to deepen into it since then.
Two questions.
Matt, one is what was the personal or religious or spiritual background for your interest in McKenna and cosmological thinking in the first place?
What's the background for that?
And two, can you say a word about McKenna, a little more about McKenna and what he found interesting about Whitehead?
Yeah.
Well, my own upbringing was in the context of a mixed family.
My mother was sort of non-denominational in her Christianity.
We would go to, I would go to Sunday school as a kid, but never really developed an abiding relationship with a particular church community.
My father was Jewish, is Jewish, and similarly, while for certain high holidays, we would visit his parents and engage in some ritual and prayer.
I never was, you know, bar mitzvahed or anything and didn't learn Hebrew, which I regret because it's one of those sacred languages that I think grants insight into the nature of being when one really starts to grapple with it.
So I came, you know, from this mixed background and as a teenager actually really became enthralled with the scientific point of view.
So Richard Dawkins, the selfish gene and Stephen Hawking's brief history of time and books like this, I picked up as like a 13, 14 year old and kind of developed into a rather hubristic atheist for a couple of years there.
And it was only a psychology course in high school with a very influential teacher.
His name was Mr. Ennis, Kai Ennis.
And he exposed me to Carl Jung and the whole depth psychological point of view, archetypes of the collective unconscious.
And in that context, I was able to approach religion again with fresh eyes and to understand the role, the transformative role it plays in the context of human development and individuation, as Jung would put it.
And this high school teacher also introduced me to Alan Watts and through Watts, I was exposed to the 1960s counterculture and the whole psychedelic revolution.
And Watts wrote a book called The Joyous Cosmology, which is about his various psychedelic journeys and the implications for philosophy and the study of mysticism.
And so I became very interested in that and also with Watts' influence, started to study Buddhism quite deeply, mostly Zen, like DT Suzuki.
And I was quite enthralled with that and began trying to take up a meditation practice pretty seriously for a few years in my late teens and early 20s.
But I found myself increasingly isolated from my peers and actually growing somewhat depressed as I was attempting to transcend an ego that hadn't even fully formed yet.
And so it was at that point that I, in the context of graduate school, began to study the Western esoteric tradition, Hermeticism, Kabbalah, Christian mysticism and contemplative practice and traditions.
And that sort of brought me back home and allowed me to realize that these esoteric traditions I had been studying coming out of Asia were not unique in world history.
There were also esoteric streams, mystical streams that are rooted in experience rather than dogma, also in the West.
And so I kind of came full circle there and in the mix here was Terence McKenna, who he had a very deep understanding of the biblical and Greek philosophical idea of the logos.
And for him, you know, ingesting psilocybin mushrooms would awaken the logos and he had quite a facility with language himself.
And I was inspired by his ability to, in a way, what I would say, commune with logos and share logos with his audiences and in dialogue.
And, you know, his, his point of view was, you know, inspired by his psychedelic experience, trying to understand the nature of cosmic history and the development of human intelligence and artistry as this, a time developmental process, right?
And Whitehead was important for McKenna in understanding the type of metaphysics, which would allow us to understand a universe, which complexifies over the course of time and also intensifies its experiential capacities along with that complexity.
And, you know, while McKenna was not a systematic metaphysician by any stretch of the imagination, he was, he was a deeply imaginative thinker.
So I was primed by his vision of what one could do with a Whiteheadian process metaphysics way before I actually sat down to begin studying, you know, Whitehead's categorical scheme and engaging in speculative philosophy myself.
So, yeah, that's, that's, that's a bit about McKenna and myself.
Yeah.
Thanks.
Thanks so much.
And I, too, read Watts and I, too, have been interested in Zen and I, too, am interested in psychedelic experience and, and the Western tradition.
So that resonates with my own interests as well.
When you actually started reading Whitehead, what did you discover and what was important to you and what did you learn that you didn't get from McKenna?
Whitehead is a very careful scholar and historian of ideas who appreciates the thought even of those he disagrees with.
And Adventures of Ideas was the text I started with.
And so to get a sense for his vision of human civilization as this, you know, the gradual dawning of coming to consciousness of certain big ideas like freedom and love in the course of history was just such a beautiful vision to me.
And then, you know, and then the second part of Adventures of Ideas, when he gets into cosmology and the history of cosmological ideas, it provided me with a really scientifically grounded critique of the dominant mechanistic worldview.
And it was so refreshing to me to see someone articulating an organic, enchanted conception of the cosmos, not despite the scientific evidence, but really because of the scientific evidence.
And so rather than this sort of tired and I think misleading construal of this sort of split in our culture between those who want to believe in something more and those who are more scientific and need evidence, Whitehead shows that actually the evidence supports the vision of an unsold cosmos, right?
And to have a mathematician and a logician and a physicist of some repute like Whitehead make the case for the type of universe that I had had experience of and wanted to, you know, was driven to share that experience with others, just to have Whitehead to support that type of work was quite a boon for me.
And, you know, Whitehead is harder to dismiss as a crackpot than, say, someone like McKenna, not that I think McKenna is a crackpot, but he was not an academic, not someone with the sort of widespread respect that a figure like Whitehead has.
In Adventures of Ideas in those chapters on beauty and particularly the chapter on peace, did you find insights that were illuminative?
Either for you or just philosophically illuminating in general, remember how he talks about the transcendence of personality in the chapter of peace, peace is a falling away of a kind of ego-centered consciousness.
Did that ring true to you at all?
Was that side of Whitehead engaging to you?
You know, it's interesting that those last few chapters on truth, beauty, peace, and so on, when I first read Adventures of Ideas, I was probably 23.
And they didn't speak to me as much, and I think that's because I had to end the age a little bit and experience more suffering and tragedy and to recognize more in my own experience what Whitehead meant by the highest form of beauty being tragic beauty.
The harvest of tragedy right after the dream of youth.
I was still dreaming when I first read these chapters.
So my appreciation for his vision has grown over the last decade plus, definitely.
Gotcha, gotcha, gotcha.
The dreams of youth, the harvest of tragedy.
You know, that makes a lot of sense.
Did you, did you read Process and Reality at what stage and what did that mean to you?
What did that add?
I read it shortly after, within a year after Adventures of Ideas, also in the context of courses with Eric Weiss, and it was a bit baffling initially.
I had enough background in the history of modern, early modern philosophy to, you know, engage with and understand the dialogue he was having there with figures like Descartes and Locke and Kant and others, Hume, of course.
And, you know, my initial takeaway from reading Process and Reality, what really stuck with me is the way that he could draw from these various other philosophers that he disagreed with and yet find this through line where, despite their statements to the contrary, embedded within all of their thought were deep insights into the nature of experience that Whitehead wanted to preserve.
And so his very generous way of engaging with these historical figures was something that I wanted to emulate.
Because so often in academic philosophy, the method of engagement, not only with historical figures, but with one's peers is critical and dismissive and wanting to make a name for oneself.
And Whitehead was so, like, conciliatory in the way that he would integrate the views of those who came before him.
But, you know, Process and Reality is a book that, as I tell my students now, it repays decades of study.
I mean, you know, I've been studying it for more than a decade now.
I've probably read it six or seven times.
And I find something new in it every time I pick it up, you know.
This is true of most of the deep philosophical texts.
Students sometimes have the mistaken impression that you can read one of these books, whether it's Process and Reality or Being in Time or whatever, that you could read it once and get it.
And as if, like, professors who teach these books only needed to read it once to understand.
And that's just not the case.
And so I try to disabuse my students of that mistaken assumption.
And I've just fallen in love with that book over the years.
I really have.
Well, there's so much that we can talk about in that book.
And I'll start with the concept of God.
And, you know, there at the end, particularly part five, what did you make of it?
Coming from that hubristic, atheistic perspective that you had way early on, was that important to you?
Or was that kind of tangential to the substance of the book?
What did you make of part five?
Well, I mean, it showed me that Whitehead could certainly be lyrical when he put his mind to it.
And despite the sometimes dry, technical construction of elaborate categories in other parts of that book, when he got to the final interpretation, envisioning God as the poet of the world.
Whitehead himself becomes the poet.
And process theology as, you know, sort of initially articulated in that final part of process and reality has been of great personal consequence for me in allowing me to, without embarrassment, talk about the divine and use the G word in mixed company.
Because it's a vision of God that I think people of varying faiths can connect with, whether Asian traditions, Western traditions, Indigenous traditions, there's something there for everyone.
And it's a sort of theology that doesn't pass the buck, as it were, in terms of, you know, wishing for some all-powerful father figure to make it all okay or to vanquish the world of evil.
It's a participatory vision and grants human beings a role to play in furthering the beautification of the earth and the cosmos.
And it's an inspiring, motivating vision.
And I have been delighted to find that, you know, when I talk about it to my students, who many of them in my program maybe started their lives in the context of a religious family and were somewhat traumatized by more patriarchal approaches to usually Christianity.
And so they escaped religion and are very, were coming into the study of Whitehead with me, very skeptical of at least the, you know, biblical traditions, the theistic biblical traditions.
And I have found quite often that reading Whitehead and, and coming to understand his vision of the divine is a refreshing re-imagination of what the divine can mean and how we can relate to that.
And many of my students feel invited to reconsider the idea, the reality, perhaps even of, of God.
And so they've, you know, had, it's impacted them in a similar way that it did me in terms of, you know, opening my, my mind and my heart to this, you know, theistic, even if perhaps panentheistic way of relating to God, where God's part of the world, the world is in God.
And so it's a refreshing vision that I think can still speak to modern, post-modern, whatever, wherever we are in this late post-epoch where everything, everyone seems so cynical and critical.
Whitehead offers us a really positive, meaningful vision of how to relate to the ultimate ground of being.
In that part five, you know, there's so many things he says of, of God.
On the one hand, he speaks of God as a fellow sufferer who understands, and that's kind of the image of a companion, someone different, something different from us, but that nevertheless understands us in a sympathetic way.
And then he also speaks of, and then he also speaks of God as a lure, an influential, transformative agency within the world, but not all-powerful, requiring the cooperation.
Of those two images, the companion or the lure, do you find that your students are more interested in one or the other, or where do they lean?
I think it depends.
I don't want to make any sweeping generalizations, but it seems that the younger ones are interested in the lure and the older ones in the companion.
The lure is more the primordial nature, the companion is more the consequent nature.
And I think, you know, as we suffer loss of loved ones, or as we grow older, and illness or sickness becomes a real possibility, a threat to our continued existence.
I think the longing for our companion becomes more palpable, the sense that the suffering is not for nothing, and that there is, in some way, a form of immortality, whether or not it's personal, Whitehead doesn't really weigh in on that question.
But some form of immortality, where even the dead remain, God remains with the dead, the dead remain with God, and with us, in some fashion.
That seems quite helpful to some of my students, but the younger ones, particularly the artists, or who have some interest in the arts, or who are in any way inclined towards romantic poetry,
this idea of God as the lure, this idea of God as the lure is quite entrancing.
So, you know, this is why I think there's something for everyone in Whitehead's vision.
And this God as the lure, or the incitement to novelty, I think, is a vision of the divine that modern people are sort of predisposed to appreciate.
Because there is this sense of progressive building up of intensities of experience that the sort of, you know, adventurous attitude of modern people feels reflected by and seen by, you know.
And so, I think that's what makes process theology a live option nowadays, even though church attendance is down and the traditional religions seem like relics of the past.
You know, Whitehead shows that with a couple of philosophical tweaks or theological tweaks here and there, all of a sudden, you know,
the idea of a divine lure or a divine companion can be quite compelling, even for scientifically-minded and more or less secularized people.
You know, Matt, there's that one sentence in Processing Reality, tucked somewhere in the middle, where he notes that the idea of God, the concept of God, can be embraced from a secular point of view.
And he speaks of the secular function of God.
And I've always taken that to mean that one can, even a scientist, could find a principle of order and novelty in the cosmos, a helpful principle to which to appeal in understanding the nature of things,
but not have religious feelings attached there on to.
You might understand it differently.
Do you have a read on that interesting little sentence or idea in Whitehead?
Yeah.
He says something like that one of the most important tasks of philosophy in the present is the secularization of the concept of God's function in the world.
Right.
And I think in that context, he also talks about how his concept of God is, it's a metaphysician's God, and it's not rooted in or motivated by religious feeling or religious emotion.
That's important, too, but that's not what initially motivates Whitehead to include him in his metaphysical scheme.
It's God is, or the divine function, you could say, is solving a metaphysical problem.
And Whitehead first introduces God into his cosmology and science in the modern world, actually, in the chapter called God as a principle of limitation or a principle of concretion.
And he talks about how Aristotle brought God into his cosmology to solve this problem, a cosmological problem, the source of motion.
And Whitehead says, you know, physics has advanced.
We don't have that same problem anymore.
We have an analogous problem, however, which is, as Whitehead frames it, how does something actual come out of pure possibility?
How do you get finite, actual things out of infinite possibility?
And this is where God plays the role of the principle of limitation.
And Whitehead admits that God's in this role kind of the ultimate irrationality because this principle of limitation provides the ground for reasons or rationality.
And so in a scientific context or a sort of cosmological context, scientists, physicists don't often want to, some of them are open to theological ideas.
But for the most part, they'll couch it in another language, they'll talk about the fine tuning of the fundamental constants, or they'll talk about how, given our understanding of the second law of thermodynamics, that things tend to increase in disorder and entropy over time.
If we wind the cosmic clock back, we must have had a very, there must have been a very highly ordered state, a very low entropy state at the beginning of the universe.
And from that highly ordered state, given entropy, it would run down and that would account for why there is so much complexity around still.
These are scientific ways of talking about what Whitehead is just rendering in metaphysical terms as in terms of God, right?
You could say religious terms, but again, he's distinguishing between the role that God can play in a metaphysical scheme versus the role that God plays as a response to religious emotion.
I think it's an important distinction, even if later on in the book, when he brings in the consequent nature of God, he wants to make room for those religious emotions, because after all, religious experience is part of the data that a cosmologist has to take into consideration when they come up with an adequate set of categories to interpret the universe.
Let's turn to concrescence and whitehead's understanding of experience.
As you well know, in concrescence, the many becoming one in a process of prehension, and it includes subjective aims, an active decision, and feeling, and subjective form, all of those things we associate with first-person experience.
And yet the very idea can also be used by scientists, or by you, from a kind of third-person perspective, talking about the objects in the universe and how they interact, do you find it plausible to think that something like subjective aim, subjective form, feeling, exists all the way down into the depths of matter, all the way down?
And secondly, do you think that would make any sense to a scientist?
Take those two questions any way you want to.
Yeah.
Well, I do think that aim and feeling go all the way down into the depths of matter, as you put it, though I think the best way to start explaining how this could be is to remind ourselves that matter is actually one of the most abstract ideas ever imagined by the human mind.
When you look around you, you don't actually see matter anywhere.
You see form, shape, or quality, colors, you know, you don't see matter.
Matter is, you could say that Descartes imagined it in its modern form as the extended substance.
Aristotle had a different conception of matter as potential.
Modern physics, in light of quantum and relativistic physics, doesn't have any conception of substantial matter anymore, despite the fact that some scientists and popularizers of science continue to speak as if materialism remained the reigning interpretation of nature given to us by science.
So we need to start with this deconstruction of the idea of matter before we can understand Whitehead's proposal for an experiential universe or pan-experiential universe, to use David Ray Griffin's term.
Because until we remind ourselves of this, typically the pan-experientist doctrine is met with an incredulous stare.
Or the favorite dismissive retort is, you think rocks are conscious or having thoughts.
And Whitehead actually spends quite a few pages in Process and Reality talking about rocks.
And anyone who would, you know, read those would be disabused of the idea that he's saying that rocks as such are conscious.
But to say that concrescence is a mode of activity that is generic enough to describe nature at all levels.
Whether we're talking about the nature of human consciousness from moment to moment or the nature of quantum energy as they vibrate through what we normally think of as an empty space.
But in Whitehead's view, there is no such thing as empty space.
What seems to be empty is full of energetic activity.
And in Whitehead's vision, yeah, there is a quantum nature of reality, which is to say that it comes in these discontinuous leaps or drops of experience.
He uses William James' phrase.
In some ways, Whitehead's cosmology is a generalization of William James' psychology.
And, you know, concrescence describes the process whereby the past, what has perished, is re-enlivened in the present and allowed to reach into the future.
And so it's this iterative or repetitive and cumulative or growing process.
It's one of the most brilliant conceptions, I think, in the history of philosophy in that it just does so much work.
And it bridges so many gaps in other ways of construing the nature of the universe, gaps between matter and life and mind.
And so is this convincing to scientists, this sort of view?
Only those who have the curiosity to avoid becoming locked into a narrow disciplinary specialization,
who are willing to accept this philosophical need for coherence,
who want to see the universe as a whole rather than the universe as it is reflected through the narrow aperture of whatever their specialization is.
In the course of the last century, knowledge has proliferated just so much.
Every day a new scientific discipline emerges to study some of the minutiae that can be brought forth in the context of a laboratory environment.
And so Whitehead was like among maybe the last generation of polymaths who could get a grasp of the whole of knowledge to really try to put it together into a coherent picture.
There aren't many who are brave enough to do that.
You risk your professional reputation and your capacity to advance academically if you do this sort of thing.
And so there are sociological reasons that some scientists might be skeptical due to the nature of the professionalized university disciplines.
But I think, I mean, this is complicated, but there's a great philosopher, Charles Taylor, who writes about the modern age and the scientific revolution as not just a sort of epistemological transformation where we gain this new way of knowing about nature and about ourselves and human nature,
And that there was a moral transformation and that coming to view nature as a kind of deterministic law abiding machine was crucial in the liberation of the human being in a political and moral sense.
The growth of this, the growth of this, the notion of the free individual with rights was always at least historically made possible by a contrast with nature, which was not free, but determined, right?
And by developing science and technology, human society could advance in this project of liberating individuals by gaining ever more technological control over nature.
And so I share this just to say that the mechanistic picture of the universe, though, we need to critique and reimagine that for social and ecological reasons today.
I think historically it served a function in our moral development, allowing us to develop what Charles Taylor calls the buffered self, right?
An enchanted universe might sound beautiful and, you know, there are angelic hierarchies and elemental beings and all of this, but enchantment also means demons and incubi and succubi and forms of possession that the modern buffered self doesn't have to worry itself about anymore, right?
Because we've developed this autonomous, rational agency.
And so I think, yeah, there's a relationship between the development of that agency and the mechanization of nature, but we've gone through that.
And it's time to imagine a new kind of perhaps more relational identity among individuals, reestablish a sense of community that's not the futile, pre-modern forms of community that were maybe a little too suffocating.
I think Whitehead's vision of a universe driven by this process of concrescence gives us a lot to work with as we make this effort, which is not just scientific, it's also moral.
Well, I want to go back to matter just for a second.
If I could repose my question, I'd say, do you think it makes sense to speak of feeling, decision, subjective aim, subjective form as being at every level of actuality?
And I need not use the word matter there, but in a way I still want to.
And I'd like to say why.
At this moment, I'm sitting at a desk and I can touch the desk.
And that's a quality I realize touch, but the desk actually resists me in some way.
If I push, I cannot push it at will.
The desk has a kind of, and I'm going to use Whitehead's word, a kind of givenness to it.
And I experienced what he called experience in the mode of causal efficacy.
It affects me and I can't will it away.
And I wonder, do you think that notion of givenness, the givenness of the past in Whitehead's terms, and experience in the mode of causal efficacy, being affected by something other than you, that you simply can't will away, it's given for your experience.
Does that play a role in your own conceptuality, the notion of the givenness of the past, related to that is his idea of the withness of the body.
Any thoughts on any of those?
Anything I just said?
Yeah.
So when I teach Whitehead, I often construe his cosmology as an alternative, both to materialism and to idealism.
He's a realist.
He calls his philosophy organic realism, precisely for the reasons you're pointing to, Jay, that there is a given world of stubborn facts.
And we have to inherit those facts in order to act and decide.
Before we can introduce novelty, we need to deal with what's given.
There's a story of Whitehead lecturing at Harvard.
He was co-teaching with an idealist, Ernest Hawking.
And Whitehead was getting fed up with the idealistic implications of Hawking's view and was like, you know, being tackled in rugby, like, that's the real, you know.
Anyone who hasn't been in the middle of the scrum, having their shins kicked bloody, just might not understand what it means to exist in a real world, you know, with others.
And, you know, in a more metaphysically abstract way, he would say that the present moment is characterized by the influx of the other, right?
So there's something more than just my mind.
And even, you know, in his gentle polemics with some of the British idealists, he would caution against the idea that the universe is really one mind, and all of the particulars appearing within it are like maya or illusion.
He thinks that doesn't do justice to the value of individuals, right?
Individual facts, individual creatures.
God is in each of the creatures, and God manifests in the world through the particular perspectives, right, that are born out of the process of concrescence, rather than just being this quiescent, subtending absolute that's unaffected, really, by anything going on within the universe.
God is affected.
And so matter in the sense of the stubborn facts, the givenness of the past, I think, is essential to Whitehead's cosmology, because it's what differentiates it from idealism.
Now, I think idealists, idealism is becoming more popular nowadays, as is panpsychism or pan-experientialism, I wish was talked about more than the general forms of panpsychism that are getting more airtime these days.
But materialism is under fire from many directions now, and I think the idealists have some pretty good critiques of standard materialism or physicalism.
But I've often tried to argue that Whitehead provides a more balanced view here that is not prone to the excesses of the idealist point of view, right?
And it's precisely on this point of the givenness and the stubborn facts of the world that our will cannot simply wish away.
So, Matt, maybe another idea I'd like to hear your thought on, it would be the relationship of Whitehead to what I would call Neoplatonism, a certain kind of Neoplatonism.
And I'm talking about that way of looking at the world that says, ultimately, there's one reality, and let's call it God.
And everything is a manifestation of it, like photons being emitted from a single sun or ocean waves emerging from a single ocean.
Now, I know that Whitehead, in a way, rejects that.
I think he does.
I'll respond to that.
But nonetheless, it seems to me that in his notion of creativity, there's the hint of something like that.
There's a formless something, not a thing, of which absolutely everything is an expression, even God.
So that's my way of affirming something like a Neoplatonic insight in Whitehead.
But how about you?
Do you sense any way of recognizing the truth of those more monistic perspectives?
Yeah, I mean, in some ways, Whitehead is a, there's got to be seven Neos here, Neo-Neo, Neo-Neo, Neo-Neo, Neoplatonist, in the sense that he's, you know, Plato has been reinterpreted many, many times throughout the last couple millennia.
And philosophy is footnotes to Plato, right?
The European tradition, at least, but I think also the Arabic and Islamic traditions as well.
And so I think there are ways to construe, say, the, like, Plotinus's emanationist scheme in a way that is compatible with Whitehead's philosophy.
But we have to, here's, here's how I would put it, rather than there being a emanation from the one to the noose, to the world soul, to nature, to matter, that is sort of a downward trajectory with less and less being at each step.
In Whitehead, we have to transform this, this downward ladder.
And, of course, Plotinus, there's the return to the one also, but that's, that's, that's an important hint here for connecting Whitehead to Plotinus.
But I think rather than this hierarchy, where matter's at the bottom, we have to create, like, a lemniscate, if you will, right?
The infinity symbol, where, you know, Whitehead says creativity is, is both many and one.
And so if, if matter is, in Plotinus's sense, just, like, pure dispersal in the many, that is just as much a reflection of creativity as is the unity, the unity at the beginning, you know?
And so I think when you go to either extreme, you end up in the same place.
And one could argue that this is a fair interpretation already of what Plotinus and the Neoplatonic tradition is saying.
You know, there's more kind of body positivity in Neoplatonists, like Iamblichus, and a sense in which the body is a vessel for transformation of the soul in a way that maybe wouldn't otherwise be possible.
And so I think this is a rich area for sort of cross-philosophical comparison, inter-philosophical comparison.
And I didn't mean to, you know, too sharply oppose Whitehead to idealism.
It's more the, there are certain forms of monistic idealism or non-dual idealism that I often have brought up in dialogues or even debates with folks who will, strangely enough, oppose non-dualism to the view that I'm putting forward, which isn't very non-dualist.
There's always this hidden contradiction in trying to argue for the non-dualist point of view, because you're saying, nope, what you're saying is not part of my non-dual ultimate.
Or I think, you know, Whitehead certainly has room for this unified vision of the whole, but he makes a point several times in process and reality of saying, you know, this is more of a pluralistic vision than, say, Spinoza's one infinite substance or Plotinus's one beyond being.
So he wants, he's, he's more of a democratic thinker in that sense.
He wants to do justice to the democracy of fellow creatures and not rush to reduce them to the infinite absolute.
You know, John Cobb wrote an essay years ago in dialogue with Buddhism, in particular, kind of the Kyoto school of Buddhism, in which he proposed that Whitehead's distinction between creativity and God could be very helpful.
And the creativity is analogous to what the Kyoto thinkers were calling emptiness, and God is the lure and the great companion, and both, both are real.
are real.
So in seeking terminology, he said, think of creativity, that is emptiness, as the ultimate reality, and think of God as the ultimate actuality.
And so he ended up speaking of two ultimates.
And he knew that that flies in the face of so many of us who said, no, please, one ultimate, one ultimate, has to be one thing that's ultimate.
But of course, he stuck to it.
Any thoughts on that on distinguishing between an ultimate reality and an ultimate actuality?
Yeah, I think John's, John Cobb's distinction there is defensible, but it's an innovation upon Whitehead's view.
And it could be a helpful innovation.
I mean, I think Whitehead's clear that, in his view, creativity is the ultimate God as a creature of creativity.
But in an effort to be more, not just inclusive, in the sense that you're assimilating others to one's own view by making room for them, but really pluralistic in our interreligious dialogue.
I think, you know, John's innovation there is helpful for the sake of starting a new kind of conversation with Buddhists or, you know, other traditions who don't have a need for any kind of God or theistic being.
Although, you know, in Buddhism, I think this, the idea of the lure, the companion, you can talk about Buddha nature.
Tathagata, I think is it is the term.
Bhagata.
And also in Pure Land of Buddhism, there's plenty of images of divine beings that are compassionate and luring.
Let's turn to one more area now that we're in the multiplicity of religions.
Let's go to shamanism.
And one characteristic of so many shamanic traditions, but also Neoplatonism, for that matter, is a recognition of multiple planes of existence inhabited by multiple kinds of actualities.
which are encounterable, but some of those actualities are not three-dimensional in the sense of being available to the physical eye.
Another kind of eye, yes, but not the physical eye.
Do you think that Whitehead's philosophy is conducive to an expanded pluralism that could include multiple kinds of actuality, not simply the three-dimensional?
Yeah, I certainly think so.
In Processing Reality, I think, I can't remember the exact way that he phrases it, but he speculates about actual occasions and societies or historical roots of occasions that didn't have the same balance of physical and mental poles, and that he leaves open the possibility of occasions which could be more in the mental pole than in the physical pole.
As we're used to understanding what physics means, what the physical pole of an actual occasion is.
And, you know, I've thought a lot about this, both in the context of so-called disincarnate entities, but also in trying to reconcile Whitehead's cosmology with the psychology or meta-psychology of Carl Jung, and what are archetypes in a Whiteheadian cosmos?
They're not eternal objects, that's clear, because as Jung understands archetypes, they have agency, they're beings, they're the gods and goddesses that make up, you know, the human psyche.
And so they're somewhere, they're kind of these hybrid entities somewhere between eternal objects and actual occasions, at least as we're used to those in the physical world.
You know, so I haven't developed this in a paper, but in dialogue with some others who are interested in this, trying to think of archetypes in some way along the lines of Whitehead's propositional feelings, and that they're in some ways inhabiting the divine mind and interacting with, again, the physical world as we're used to experiencing it through the physical world.
and consequent natures of God.
It's a bit fuzzy, but it's fascinating to me to think through this.
I'm pretty convinced, though, that there's room in Whitehead for this.
I think Whitehead says something like, further inquiry in these areas is an empirical matter.
You know, it's based on what we can experience, but his categorical scheme leaves room for it to be integrated into the cosmology, for sure, in my opinion.
I love the way some people would, matters that some people would consider metaphysical Whitehead says, it's an empirical question.
Yeah.
What does the evidence suggest?
You know, his notion of the extensive continuum, which sounds a lot like a multidimensional version of a space-time continuum, although he says it's not.
He says it's not.
He says it's not.
But I wonder if the extensive continuum is an opening to affirm places, in a way, sites, where non-physical actualities might have their own regions.
That's his language.
Regions.
So I wonder if that would help in some way.
And also his notion of hybrid prehensions, links from one mental pole to another actuality.
Any thoughts on that?
Have you been able to make sense of this idea of extensive continuum?
How are you doing on that one?
Yes.
Well, you know, part four of Process and Reality is one of the most difficult philosophical inquiries that I've ever had to make sense of, or try to make sense of.
I see Whitehead there trying to elaborate a contemporary reconstruction of Plato's receptacle, which is, as Plato says, a dark and difficult idea.
Very obscure, because it's almost like one way of characterizing the receptacle is as it's the form of formlessness.
Right?
It's the matrix within which forms can come to manifestation.
I think Whitehead wants to distinguish metrical space-time from the extensive continuum, which is a more general idea than just the space-time of our cosmic epoch.
And so I think we can say that it is this pregnant, multi-dimensional womb within which many forms of actuality could come to be and communicate with us, perhaps via hybrid prehension, not through any measurable physical means.
But, you know, Whitehead doesn't, he's doing plenty of speculation on so many other matters and he doesn't speculate too much about what my teacher, Eric Weiss, used to call trans-physical entities.
But actually, Eric Weiss, his dissertation, was using Whitehead and Aurobindo and others to begin to elaborate upon the metaphysical principles that might be involved in a cosmos, including trans-physical beings.
Well, so many indigenous traditions, but actually many kinds of traditions, speak of departed ancestors as living.
You know, we live and live and have our being in a home of ancestral spirits, as well as the physical world.
And I wonder if, if your notion of a womb, a multi-dimensional womb, where other kinds of actualities can reside, might at least be a lens to which to think about that and a loss of communication.
Well, listen, this has been a great conversation for me.
Thank you so much.
Yeah, well, I try to do my teaching in a dialogical way and I really appreciate your questions, Jay.
This has been enriching and I hope our listeners have appreciated it.
And thanks for the opportunity.
Was there a question that you wished I'd asked that I didn't ask?
I mean, there's so much to talk about that Whitehead and Process Thought generally offers so many helpful, mediating, conciliatory ways forward out of the contemporary
increasingly polarized cultural spaces that we inhabit, whether it's the science and religion debate or the debates among the religions.
You know, and so maybe next time we could talk more about how Whitehead's cosmology and process theology would help us resolve the culture war between those who would profess a more reductionistic,
scientific, scientific view of the universe and of evolution versus, say, creationists or intelligent design theorists who are holding on to this view of an interventionist, all powerful deity that's large and in charge and see if in what ways Whitehead can help mediate this debate between the warring camps.
I think that would be fun and important.
Well, I love the fact that you said next time.
So perhaps this is part one and perhaps there can be part two, because I would love to talk about those matters.
Yeah, and it deserves an hour of its own at least.
Well, for now, thank you so much.
See you next time.
All right.
I look forward to it, Jay.
Thank you.
Conversations in Process is a podcast from Open Horizons and the Cobb Institute hosted by Jay McDaniel.
If you enjoy these conversations and would like to support the show, consider becoming a friend of the Cobb Institute or making a donation at cob.institute.
Or leave a review through Apple Podcasts to help others find out about the show.
Thank you for listening.
Bye.
Bye.
