Hello and welcome back to UnHerd. I'm Florence Reid. Today I'm joined by Matthias Desmet.
He is a professor of psychology at the University of Ghent in Belgium and the author of The
Psychology of Totalitarianism. He is a world expert in a condition that he calls mass formation
psychosis, which he observed during the pandemic years. It's a legacy that if we don't learn
from, we are surely doomed to repeat. So Professor Desmet is someone I've wanted to speak to
for a long time. He joins us now live from Belgium. Matthias Desmet, welcome to UnHerd.
Well, thank you for having me on. Take us back to the beginning. How did you first become
fascinated by herd mentality? It's not something that we find many academics delving into very often.
While I was writing my PhD, the so-called replication crisis started in the sciences,
which showed, which revealed, this crisis revealed that, for instance, in the medical sciences,
up to 85% of the papers, of the academic papers, cannot be reproduced, meaning that they are
completely worthless from a scientific point of view. Even a child could see that most research,
for instance, in psychology, but also in the medical sciences, in economies and so on,
was, in most respects, completely absurd and could never lead to reliable results. And that was the
first time in my life, when I started to be fascinated by that question, how it was possible
that highly intelligent people could buy into all kinds of research methods, research narratives,
which were utterly absurd. Why is it that these university academics were unable to notice that
the replication crisis was happening? Yes, that's a very good question, of course, because
this strange phenomenon that an entire group of highly educated people, such as the academic
community, can all buy into absurd narratives, has been observed much earlier. Like in the 19th
century, Gustave Le Bon described it already. Gustave Le Bon described it already that highly educated
people, even more than people who have a much lower degree, fall prey to a kind of groupthink,
which Gustave Le Bon called already mass formation or crowd formation. And the reason why, well,
we don't know, absolutely sure, but probably it has to do with the fact that highly educated
people have a very large desire to conform for social conformism. They try to match the social ideal
image as much as possible. And that is exactly why they continue the educational system so long. So
that's probably one reason. Another reason might be that our educational system actually doesn't
learn to think people for themselves. It learns to think them all in the same way. Like our educational
system looked upon it from a certain perspective as an indoctrination system. It's a kind of indoctrination
which prepares people for propaganda that is used later on society. It makes them vulnerable for
propaganda. And so I noticed that for the first time after doing my PhD, started to be fascinated by
mass psychology, mass formation, and the associated phenomenon of the emergence of totalitarian states.
And then the corona crisis started. My spontaneous reaction was to start to study the statistics a
little bit in the first week of the crisis, because I was trained to do so. So I focused on it. I started
to study the statistics. And immediately from the first week of the crisis onwards, I published this
paper titled, The Fear of the Virus is More Dangerous Than the Virus Itself, in which I warned society,
tried to warn them that the mortality rates of the virus, the official statistics dramatically
overrated the mortality rates of the virus. I published this paper. Almost everyone knew it in
Belgium and all they think that paper, but it didn't make a difference. And strangely enough,
like three or four months later, it was proven beyond the shade of a doubt that actually me and several
other sceptical statisticians had been right, that the initial statistics had been dramatically
overrating the dangers of the virus. Let's just pause there for a moment, because of course, now,
given what we know, it's much more generally understood that there is a vast gap between the
hypothetical, catastrophic models of COVID destruction and the reality of the deadliness of the disease.
I think many people who previously would have been sceptical of that now accept that. But at the time
when you were publishing that article, that would have been quite a dangerous thing to say. What was
the response from your colleagues and from the wider community when you wrote that?
It was, it was terrible. It was like, there was so much monthly people trying to smear my reputation,
like during the first weeks of the crisis, I think that I was the first one in Belgium to speak out
in a critical way, at least the first professor, or at least the first in the media. And I remember that
in a few days, I was like public enemy number one in Belgium. And nevertheless, I had the feeling like,
okay, my training did prepare me very well for this moment. And if I don't do it, who will do it? So I
decided to continue to speak out. And then after a few months, in May 2020, I decided to change my strategy
because at that moment, it was proven beyond the shade of doubt that the mortality rates indeed had been
wrong. Like for instance, the initial statistical models predicted that in a small country such as Sweden,
60,000 people would die if the country didn't go into lockdown by the end of May 2020. And by the end of May 2020,
only 6,000 people died in Sweden. And even more convincing was the fact that the people who build the initial
models actually admitted in a hearing before the House of Commons that their initial statistics had
been dramatically overrating the virus. So it was clear at that moment. And even that didn't make a
difference. Society and the media, the mainstream media continued as if the initial statistics had
been right. And that was the moment where I decided to focus on the psychological processes, where I decided
to try to show people why an entire society could go along with the narrative that was utterly absurd.
And that was much more successful than trying to show people in a statistical way what's had been
wrong.
So this is a question many of us had during the pandemic, those of us who have a more
sceptical nature, I suppose, is why is it that people are happy to live under a lie? Why is it that
many people seem not just willing, but actually kind of exuberant to embrace a narrative that is quite
patently untrue, especially people who otherwise have been sceptical, questioning people all of their
lives? What is it about a moment of crisis like that, that it really encourages people into a herd
mentality?
To understand that, to understand why people fall prey to this herd mentality, group dream, or as I
call it, mass formation process, you need to understand two things. You need to understand how
throughout the last 200 years, an elite emerged, which used more and more accessibly propaganda.
So that's one thing. But there is a second process besides propaganda, which is also extremely
important. Namely, throughout the last 200 years, the population became more vulnerable, less resilient
for propaganda. And the reason was that the population started to feel more and more lonely.
And that in its turn was a consequence of the rationalist view on men in the world. So I won't
explain why the rationalist view on men in the world, this materialist view on men in the world,
led to loneliness. But just assume that it is the case. So we could see the last 200 years,
that more and more people start to feel lonely. And just before the corona crisis, loneliness
peaked, like up to 60% of the people worldwide reported to feel lonely and only connect to other
people through the internet. And the UK, Theresa May appointed a minister of loneliness because she
knew that many people felt lonely. And then the United States, the US Surgeon General reported that
there was a loneliness epidemic. So and that's crucial. As soon as people feel lonely, they will
start to be confronted with lack of meaning. Okay, they will. And you see that, for instance, in the
fact that before the corona crisis, up to 60% of the people reported that they considered their own
job to be a so called bullshit job, a job without any meaning or purpose. And once they are once people
feel lonely, and once they feel that their life makes no meaning, they will typically be confronted
with what I call in my book, freely floating anxiety, frustration and aggression, that means
their mental system will be saturated with a kind of anxiety, frustration and aggression,
they cannot connect to a mental representation. And when many people feel like that, and the number
of people feeling like that increased time after time throughout the last 200 years, when many people
feel like that, and the entire society is saturated with this freely floating anxiety, something very
typical might happen. If under these conditions, someone distributes a narrative through the mass media, indicating
an object of anxiety, and providing a strategy to deal with that object of anxiety, for instance,
lockdowns to deal with a dangerous virus, if someone provides such a narrative, indicating an object of anxiety,
anxiety, and the strategy to deal with that object of anxiety, all this freely floating anxiety, might at once
connect to the object of anxiety, because that's something our psychological system does in a spontaneous way,
because in that way, without knowing it, we feel in control again, because if we are anxious, without knowing what we feel anxious for,
we feel completely out of control, and we are always looking for narratives which indicate an object of anxiety, and provide a strategy to deal with that object of anxiety.
So, that's the first step of the formation of a mass, of a mass formation, of the formation of a herd, you could say. And then, a second step happens, which is even more important.
In the second step, because so many people, at the same time, participate in the strategy to deal with the object of anxiety,
people have the feeling that they fight a collective, heroic battle with the object of anxiety, the collective battle with the virus, and people feel as if they escape their loneliness, which was their initial problem.
So, and that's why you could see during the corona crisis, all these nurses and doctors dancing together, and people clapping their hands.
That is just a result of this strange enthusiasm. People feel, if they have been feeling lonely for a long time, if they have been feeling that their life was without purpose for a long time,
and they suddenly have the feeling that they are connected again, and they have the feeling that their life has a new purpose. So that is what actually happens in the formation of a mass.
This is quite counterintuitive though, in a way, because many people might argue that, oh, this is just downstream from a kind of natural herd mentality that seems to abound in culture, and people just go along with the group.
But actually, what you're suggesting is that it's born of hyper individualization, that it's the isolation of the individual that leads them to the point where they are mentally weak from the level of loneliness that they suffer because of that isolation.
And that it's in fact an attempt to individualization, and that it's in fact an attempt to individualize people that has caused them to get to the point where they hook on to any crisis that would allow them to join a collective. Is that kind of correct where I'm at?
Exactly. So you have, you know, the ancient masses were different from the modern masses. The modern masses were also called lonely masses. That's something that was described by Jacques Rue, for instance, in his book on propaganda.
These modern masses, meaning masses, these lonely masses, meaning masses who were formed not by people who meet in person or physically, but by people who are all sitting isolated in their own living rooms, being infused by propaganda and narratives and mental representations through the mass media.
Well, these lonely masses emerge exactly at the moment of extreme individualism. First, you have extreme individualism, and then suddenly people lapse into the opposite, like extreme collectivism.
That's what a mass formation is, and that's how a totalitarian state emerges. A totalitarian state, as Hannah Arendt said, is a diabolic pact between masses who use relentlessly propaganda to manipulate the population and the part of the population, usually 20 to 30%, who blindly goes along with the propaganda.
So exactly, that's what happens in a mass formation. First extreme individualism and isolation, then extreme collectivism.
You say 25 to 30% less, people might be surprised by how low that number is. It feels like an extraordinarily small amount of population.
Tell us more about that. How is that possible that a small amount of society could then cause this radical change?
The largest group in society usually dominates society. And what is so characteristic of totalitarianism is that it is dominated by a relatively small, 20 to 30% group, but which has a very extreme cohesion, which all things the same, has the same ideal images, is in the grip of the same propaganda.
And then 60 to 65% of the people, sometimes even more, get so scared of this group, they know that there is something wrong with this narrative, but they just prefer to remain silent.
And then there is an even smaller group who actually chooses to speak out. And then that group is just crucial. That group usually is between 1 and 10%, somewhere in between.
And generally, I would love this next person is a real world of personal management from the 21st century.
Like, one of the crucial things is that the mass formation, as I said, seem to liberate people from their loneliness.
And it seems to liberate them from their loneliness, because in reality, it makes them even more lonely.
Because a mass is a group, a very typical kind of group.
It is a group that is formed, not because people connect to each other, but because people all connect to the same collective ideal, meaning that, or the same collective narrative, the same collective ideology, meaning that, like, after a while, a mass formation sucks away all the love, all the energy between people, and it injects it all in the bond between the individual and the collective.
So, the bonds between individuals become weaker and weaker, and the bond between the individual and the collective becomes stronger and stronger.
And after a while, you can see that even the strongest bonds between individuals, such as the bond between a child and its mother, become weaker than the bond between the individual and the state or the collective.
This is the famous kind of Soviet example.
Every time again, everyone starts to report everyone.
Mothers report their children to the state.
Children report their mothers to the state.
You can find this conversation on the internet of me with Yolef Ishtari, an Iranian woman who lived in Iran during the revolution in 1979.
And she describes there how, as a member of the upper class of Iran, she had to witness how people were hung on Friday evening.
And one evening, she saw a mother who reported her son to the state.
And this mother went on the scaffold, hung the noose around the neck of her son.
And when he died, she was very proud to receive a medal for being a heroine for what she did.
That is the dramatic end stage of a mass formation, where all the love between people is sucked away and all injected in the bones of the collective.
So, once you understand that, you understand something very important.
Mass formation is mass hypnosis.
And in the end stage of the hypnosis, people become so convinced of the hypnotizing narrative that they are willing to eliminate everyone who doesn't go along with that narrative.
And the hypnosis is produced by the voice of a hypnotist, namely the propagandist.
And if there is no one else who speaks out during a mass formation, then the mass hypnosis will almost always go to the last stage,
where people start to be so much in the grip of the mass formation that they are willing to kill and eliminate everyone.
So, that means that this small group of people who are willing to speak out absolutely should do it.
Gustave Le Bon described that already in the 19th century.
He said, this small group of people will never be capable of waking up the masses, usually not.
But, that doesn't mean that their words have no effect.
If they continue to speak out, they will constantly disturb the hypnosis and prevent it from going to the last stage.
And make sure that the masses do not arrive at the ultimate stage, where they start to be convinced that they have to eliminate everyone.
So, it's just crucial.
No matter from what perspective you observe the phenomenon of mass formation and the emerging totalitarianism, continue to speak out.
That's what history has shown us.
Time and time again, if the people who did not go along with the system stop to speak out, the cruelty start.
And there are examples, I assume, through history where there has been an earlier intervention.
We don't only see kind of the full formation of mass psychosis.
We have sometimes seen these early forms and early rumblings and then they have died down.
I mean, I actually would argue that COVID might have been one of those examples of a situation that did seem to plateau and then fall off,
given the lives that we're all leading now that could have been very different had some people had their way.
Tell me about those previous examples where actually individuals or a rejection of that kind of mass mentality did in some way change the course of history.
Well, there were many examples.
There were many examples like actually in the beginning of the 20th century, totalitarianism started in many places around the world.
And the reason why it developed into a fully fledged totalitarian system in Germany and Russia probably was because there, very clearly, the resistance preferred to stop to speak out.
And there were in many other places, Britain, there were many other emerging totalitarian systems.
But there, the reason probably was that there, the resistance didn't make the choice to stop to speak out.
And there, the emerging totalitarianism mitigated and in most places almost disappeared.
And now in the corona crisis, we probably have seen the same.
Like, for instance, a few months ago, the WHO declared a medical emergency situation because of the monkeypox.
And nobody really bought into the narrative and they, after a few days, they declared the emergency situation over.
So, the same people who actually champion or want to create a globalist, technocratic surveillance totalitarianism, including a top-down imposed medical policy, the same people, of course, will use every opportunity they have to try to impose the same system as during the corona crisis.
And, but we see that in, like with the monkeypox, it just didn't work.
And I also, I believe that it has a lot to do with the fact that there are many people, maybe it's a small percentage, but still many people who decided and who are very determined to continue to speak out.
So, what we have to do is to continue to speak out in a very quiet way, not claiming that we are the only ones who know the truth, no, but just saying like, okay, to me, this doesn't feel good.
And I will, I don't say that you are wrong and I am right, but I just say that I will live up to the ethical duty every human being has to try to articulate what he feels inside.
That's the point.
Ironically, almost the COVID pandemic might have acted as like a psychological vaccine for upcoming pandemics, where we've just seen it with MPOX, where the suggestion is that we should be entering into the same level of hysteria and the necessary lockdowns and all of the things that went along with COVID.
But you have more people who seem immune to that herd mentality now.
Is that actually an optimistic sign?
Is that something we should feel happy about, that because we averted a totalitarian health state, that we've managed to now put ourselves in a better position for the coming decades, when new threats of totalitarianism and crackdowns come down the line?
Yes, definitely.
I am very optimistic about that.
You know, I'm realistic in the short run, I believe that in the coming years, we will go through difficult times, like there is not only the MPOX narrative or the corona narrative, there is also the Ukraine narrative, the Middle East narrative, and so on, which actually are also heavily propagandized narratives, which in their way, also might lead us into a totalitarian system.
But I agree with you that during the corona crisis, so many people started to become aware that there is so much manipulation, that these globalist institutions, in a certain way, can go quite mad.
And that we don't have to try to find an alternative, and mankind will have to look for an alternative for a different way of human living together than this technocratic way.
And I'm in the long run, I'm very optimistic, I really believe, I hear the same everywhere, everywhere, I travel so much, almost every week I go abroad to get lectures and talks, and everywhere I notice that there are so many people who start to become aware, for instance, of the value of truth and sincerity for the human being.
Like so many people start to be aware, and this society, which is sick of propaganda and manipulation and lies, so many people start to become aware, that we have to try to re-appreciate and to rediscover what it means for a human being to speak the truth.
My intuition tells me that we are going through a metaphysical revolution right now, and that this metaphysical revolution essentially boils down to this.
What we see is a kind of process in which a propagandized mass, a mass, a crowd in the grip of propaganda, is going through a kind of a battle or a struggle or a confrontation with a group of people who are united by sincerity and truth speech.
Or at least I see how this group of people who is trying to resonate with sincerity, who is trying to find out what truth is, that this group of people slowly emerges in society, and it's very simple.
The era of totalitarianism, which started in the beginning of the beginning of the 20th century, the era of totalitarianism will be over as soon as this group, united by sincere speech, will be energetically stronger than the propagandized mass.
So that's what we have to rediscover altogether.
What does it mean for a human being to speak in a sincere way?
This situation, though, could be very easily politically manipulated.
I mean, just in the last few days, I've watched Donald Trump sit in front of journalists from Bloomberg and the Wall Street Journal and tell them to their face that they are marketeers of fake news and that they are spreading lies,
to massive applause from an audience who are exactly in the position that you describe, people who have felt that they have come out of some state of psychosis and have entered into the light of the truth.
And someone like Donald Trump is right there to collect them when they emerge.
Is that something that concerns you?
Are you positive about the idea of these large political figures who are using the kind of descriptions of an idea of totalitarianism, mass psychosis to further their own political aims?
Or is that something that actually holds risk for us in the long-term future?
Both are true.
These people, these politicians can be part of the solution and they can be part of a new problem.
Let's say that the fact that you do not fall prey to one mass formation does not mean that you cannot fall prey to a different mass formation.
And I observed that during the corona crisis as well, I think, like there were a certain percentage of the people who didn't buy into the corona narrative,
but who sometimes bought into other narratives, which also led to the emergence of a mass, a group of people where everyone had to have the same opinion,
who all had the same object of anxiety.
And Donald Trump might not fall prey to the mainstream mass formation, but he might give rise to a new mass formation.
That's perfectly possible. And I don't say he will do that.
I don't say that.
He might. Nobody knows how Donald Trump will evolve.
And there is a certain risk associated with Donald Trump, but every human being is risky.
And nobody knows exactly what he or she will do when he wears the ring of power.
So I would say let's hope that Donald Trump evolves in a good direction.
But nothing, we have no guarantee that it will be the case, of course.
Are you still practicing psychoanalysis? Is that something you still have time for in your busy schedule?
Yes.
When you're sitting in a room with a patient, do you notice things about their psychology, their inner world that reflects what you're describing here and in the kind of outside structures?
Yes, definitely. Since the corona crisis, you can see how this loneliness, disconnectedness between people, the dividedness in society leaves its traces.
And so at the individual level as well, the prevalence of anxiety and depression, I think, has increased with 25 or 30 percent in society since the corona crisis.
And what I can see is that now most people who come to my practice are people who are skeptical about the corona narrative.
And people who are not skeptical about the corona narrative often do not come anymore.
And I think that's very sad because we should not allow a narrative to divide us.
We should just accept, OK, you go along with this narrative, I go along with a different narrative, or at least we should try to be as open as possible for our opinions.
And I think it's sad that as a therapist, I attract people, not all of them, absolutely not identify with the same narrative.
You become an echo chamber yourself after working so hard to help other people exit their echo chambers.
It's a tough gig. But tell me more then about that kind of empathy we could have for the other,
because I think it's very tempting for anyone who's spoken out during one of these times of crisis and feels themselves to have paid the price for speaking out,
that you want to damn those who were part of the herd.
Can actually that vision of this as more of a state of hypnosis herd mentality give us a bit more empathy and grace to those who have taken part in what might be,
in the case of coronavirus, you know, some quite antisocial behavior in the case of, as you mentioned, the Iranian regime, absolutely horrendous crimes.
How can we think about those people in a more gracious way when we understand really what's going on in the psychology behind it?
The theory on mass formation can help people to consider the other people who did go along, who did buy into the narrative, to be human beings.
At least many people told me that when they learned about my theory, that for the first time they could understand that their family members, for instance, reacted in the way they did.
So I think it can be helpful to understand the mechanism of mass formation.
We should also be aware that actually falling prey to mass formation is something that just can happen.
We might also fall prey to certain mass formation, to certain group things, to certain herd mentalities.
I think we all do from time to time.
Of course, it's clear.
Some people are more vulnerable for it than other people.
And some people are really capable of going to the last stage of the mass formation where they start to, where they really start to dehumanize everyone who doesn't go along with them.
So, and then we have something very important here, like in a mass formation or in an emerging totalitarian system, what happens is that people lose all ethical awareness.
They lose all ethical awareness and they are dehumanizing.
So, the only resistance against totalitarianism is to do exactly the opposite.
That is something that Solzhenitsyn, for instance, describes in a very evocative way in his book, The Gulag Archipelago, where he describes how we live in the gulags under Stalin for 15 years, I think.
And what he describes is the following.
The only resistance against mass formation and totalitarianism, against this radical dehumanization of society, is to stay loyal to ethical principles and to humanity yourself.
So, that means that you do not react in the same way.
If people treat you in an inhuman way, if people don't want to listen to you anymore, if people believe you are crazy, if people believe that you are a danger for society, if people believe that you should be excommunicated, then you have to react, at least that is what I believe, in exactly the opposite way.
You have to say, okay, maybe you don't want to listen to me, but I will try to listen to you.
And for me, you are still a human being.
It's perfectly human to become inhuman, strangely enough.
So, that's the point.
We should always, while the world dehumanizes, the only remedy is to be the one who stays loyal to ethical principles, him or herself.
That's what Solzhenitsyn describes in such a beautiful way.
That's what the people like Levi described after being in the concentration camps in Nazi Germany.
That's exactly what they described.
What gives a human being the strength to survive this?
What gives a human being the strength to go through this?
What gives a human being the capacity to do something about all this is to stay loyal to ethical principles in the first place.
The ethical principle that every human being has the duty to articulate the words that seem sincere and honest at that moment.
So, that's the point, I think.
The only, we will never be able to predict what will happen in the years to come.
There is a very good chance that society lapses into extreme chaos where nothing is predictable anymore.
Initially, the system will try to use the chaos to impose a surveillance society.
That's clear.
But even that will never be able to control the chaos because it's also like there's a complex dynamical system.
And the characteristic of a system that goes into a chaotic phase, a complex dynamical system, is that it is uncontrollable.
Even the smallest difference in a system can make the system manifest in a completely different way.
So, there is a very good chance that we are heading for chaos, extreme chaos.
And the only thing that will be capable of being a guiding principle, a guiding light in this chaos, is ethical principles.
We should not worry too much about rationally understanding what will happen.
I think it's good that we try to rationally understand what happens.
But it's not that what will bring the solution.
It's not that what will give us a certain stability as a human being.
The only thing that will give us a certain stability as a human being is just this.
No matter what happens, we will be the people.
We will just stay loyal to ethical principles.
Are the rationalists who have spent all of their lives working to dismantle religion as a form of mass formation psychosis,
the idea of the Christian faith, the church, being an example of herd mentality,
have they done more harm than good then?
Because the destruction of those religious communities must have some part to play in the increased loneliness and lack of community
that we are now seeing that has led us into the state we're in.
Or do you think that actually that is a noble aim in itself and that wherever someone seeks out herd mentality, they ought to fight it?
Yeah, that's a complicated question you asked there.
Because the problem of totalitarianism started when the religious fuel man in the world was replaced by the rationalist fuel man in the world.
So you can clearly see that mass formations existed also when the religious fuel man in the world was dominant.
Let's say before the 18th century, the mass formations became much stronger after the collapse of the religious fuel man in the world.
They lasted so long and so many people fell prey to it that the mass formations could give rise to this new kind of state in the beginning of the 20th century,
this new kind of state which was called the totalitarian state.
So there is a certain relationship between the collapse of the religious fuel man in the world and the emergence of the problem of mass formation and totalitarianism.
At the same time, returning to institutionalized religion wouldn't be a real solution to the problem because institutionalized religion definitely in our times combined with the kind of technology we have,
the kind of mastery that we have, would probably also give rise to the mass formation.
So I believe rather that what we have to rediscover is the seminal, the original religious experience,
which actually, strangely enough, is quite similar to the original scientific experience.
Someone like Albert Einstein said in the preface of a book of Max Planck, he said,
many people think that science is born from rational thinking, but that's not true at all, he said.
Science is born from a certain capacity to resonate with the phenomenon you investigate.
And he used the German term Einführung, feeling one.
Science is born from a capacity to feel one, to feel empathically connected with what you investigate.
And in a speech for a certain American university, he said,
And this feeling is identical to a cosmic religious feeling.
So actually, both religion and science, all the mystical traditions, emerge from a feeling of unity,
an awareness that we are identical, that we are all part of the same universe and soul.
All religious principles, which say that you shouldn't do something to someone else that you don't want to be dealt to yourself, for instance.
They actually all emerge from this awareness, from this feeling of unity.
And it's that original experience, that original, seminal, religious and scientific experience,
which we should rediscover, and which we should make the center of a new way, or a new way,
or a new way of living together.
And someone who wrote a wonderful book about that was someone we all know,
Alec Booth Huxley, who wrote this book, A Brave New World,
in which he showed one of the most important thinkers about totalitarianism.
But what few people know is that he wrote a second book, a second book much later on in his life,
which was titled The Doors of Perception.
And in that other book, he talks about exactly this experience, this experience of unity.
And I believe that, like, in this way, Aulus Huxley tried to provide an alternative for the totalitarian paradise.
Like, all totalitarian thinkers, all totalitarian leaders actually believe that they will bring their people
to a new, rational, technological paradise.
Hitler thought so, Stalin thought so, and now ideologues like Yuval Noah Harari think the same.
You and being will merge with technology, and a new technological paradise will open,
where people don't die anymore, where they don't suffer anymore, and so on, so on,
where there is no war anymore, that's the totalitarian paradise.
Hannah Arendt said, there is not really one problem with the totalitarian paradise,
and it is that, in the end, it looks so suspiciously not like hell, she said.
And that's the point, I believe, that Aulus Huxley tried to offer a real alternative
for a totalitarian paradise, a paradise that emerges quite to the contrary of the totalitarian paradise.
Exactly at the moment, we stop thinking rationally, and we can start to resonate again.
We can start to know the world around us in a resonating way, in an empathic way.
What is it like to be a scientist who rejects rationality?
That must be a strange position to be in.
All major scientists did so.
All major scientists articulated this idea that, in the end,
the essence of life can never be grasped in a rational way.
That's just crucial.
Of course, we have to think rational, as rational as possible.
I love to think rational, but rational understanding is not our destiny.
If you really walk the path of rationality in a faithful way, until the end,
you will reach a point where you transcend rational thinking,
and where you move to a new way of knowing,
a way of knowing that is much more feeling in nature,
that gets in touch with the object it tries to know,
that resonates with the object it tries to know.
Samurai culture was very well aware of that.
The entire rational training to become a martial artist
was finished not before.
You left all rationally learned techniques behind,
and moved to a new way of practicing the martial arts,
an intuitive way,
a way of practicing the martial arts,
starting from the sixth sense of the warrior.
So when the science is shown, it's actually the same.
We need to walk the path of rationality as far as possible,
but our destiny, the ultimate understanding,
is not rational in nature.
My final question for you, before I let you go, Matthias,
are there any common traits of the people,
the individuals, or the groups,
who successfully thwart mass formation psychosis?
From the 19th century onwards,
when mass formation was studied in a more of a systematic way,
this question has been asked.
And almost every talk, and every lecture,
and every workshop I give,
this question is repeated.
Like, what characterizes the people
who do not fall prey to mass formation?
You know, my first answer would be,
nobody knows.
Because throughout the last two centuries,
nobody was really capable of specifying certain characteristics
that all people share
that do not fall prey to mass formations.
In the end,
I do believe that there is something
these people share,
that, you know,
everyone sometimes falls prey to a mass formation.
But there are certain characteristics
that can make you wake up
from every mass formation time and time again.
And this is the most fundamental characteristic,
definitely, I believe,
is a certain loyalty to sincerity and truth.
As a human being,
we can always choose
between two ways
of finding a certain strength
and a certain stability.
Most people will always try to
find a certain strength,
a certain stability
in the world of appearances.
That means
that most people
will do their utmost best
to look a little bit
like that ideal image
the other wants them to embody.
They will do their utmost best
to live up
to all kinds of
social rules
which other people
impose to them
just because they want
to feel
what the other
wants them to be.
Okay,
that's one way
to find a certain stability.
And then
there is a second way
to find a certain stability
which is exactly the opposite.
What also
gives you a certain stability
is to do exactly the opposite,
to try to be
as sincere as possible,
to try to
articulate
these things
that people
usually hide
behind
this world of appearances
that people
usually
don't want to show
to other people.
And
that sincere speech,
sincere speech
is a kind of speech,
sincere words
or this kind of words
which reveal something
that you usually hide
behind your outer
fake ideal image.
that kind of speech
is a kind of speech
that literally
if you speak
starting from
that which you hide
behind your outer
ideal image
your speech
literally
penetrates
through
the veil of appearances.
It penetrates
through it.
It makes
a hole
in your ego
and
through that hole
you start to resonate
again with the gold
around you.
you start to feel
really connected
with the gold
around you
and it is this
resonating feeling
this feeling
of being real
of existing
as a soul
it's that feeling
that also gives
a certain stability
and so
it's this choice
as a human being
we always have
the choice
either we try
to find our strength
and stability
in the world
of appearances
or we try to find it
in the real world
and the decisive act
the decisive act
is the act
of speech
if we choose
to speak sincerely
we will always
lose something
in the world
of appearances
but
we will win
something
in the real world
and
in the beginning
speaking sincerely
always demands
that you want
to go
through this
phase of anxiety
and uncertainty
because when you
speak sincerely
you always lose
something
in the fake world
you always have
the feeling
like that people
might stop
liking you
or something
because you do
not match
the ideal image
anymore
and that's the
risk we have
to take
we have to be
willing to lose
something
maybe even
everything
in the world
of appearances
in order to win
the only thing
that really matters
and only to win
who we really are
in order to really
become someone
in the real world
Matthias I'm sure
we could talk
for hours more
but I'm afraid
we have to end
thank you
it's been a real
pleasure to have
you on today
thank you for
having me on
it was a pleasure
to talk with you
that was
Professor Matthias
Desmond of the
University of Ghent
an expert in
totalitarianism
and mass formation
psychosis
the condition
that he has coined
which led us
to our pandemic
lives
but also perhaps
have taught us
about what it means
to be a resister
of herd mentality
the lessons we
learnt from
Covid
and that era
might be carried
forward into
years to come
and he has a bit
of optimism for us
there
that actually
the robustness
of the psychology
of a group
who have gone
under the spell
of mass formation
psychosis
and broken out of it
might be stronger
than it was before
thanks to him
for coming on
to you for watching
this was Unheard
