Well, thank you so much. And I'm delighted to be here. Thank you for putting on such an amazing symposium and giving me the opportunity to share some thoughts with you and in long form.
So what I'm going to talk about today is basically the fields of collective intelligence in unconventional spaces.
And if anybody would like to get in touch with me afterwards, all of the primary papers, the software, everything else is here.
So I want to start by just showing one of my heroes, Alan Turing.
We all know that he was a forefather of artificial intelligence.
He was very interested in this idea of creating cognitive systems and various kinds of intelligence.
And this is this is this is well known.
What's maybe less well known is that the same person was really interested in morphogenesis.
He wrote one of the very early papers on on trying to understand self-organizing chemical systems.
And you might wonder why it is that the same person would be interested in intelligence and morphogenesis.
And I think that he saw a very deep parallel between these two these these two areas of study.
And I think he was right on the money in the sense that I think these are actually very much the same question.
Now, most of the time when we think of intelligence, we think of something like this.
So here's a brain and we think of, OK, here's a here's a what, quote unquote, centralized intelligence of some some animal.
And then we look at things like this and colonies and so on.
And sometimes we talk about them as distributed or collective intelligence, a swarm, cognition and so on.
You know, Ricard Soleil calls them liquid brains.
But actually, it's important to realize that this is just a matter of scale, because if one zooms in, you find out that we are all, in fact, collective intelligences and we are all made of something like this.
So this is a single cell. This is a lacrimaria.
It has no brain. It has no nervous system.
It has no cell to cell communications or stem cells or any of the things that we're used to having in bodies.
And what it what it does is it handles all of its local needs.
So it's a morphological, behavioral, metabolic and so on at the single cell level very competently.
And the amazing thing about this is that we all have taken the same journey from what what might be called just physics, which is an oocyte.
Right. A set of a set of chemical reactions that people would look at and would think, OK, this this has no cognitive capacity.
This is just just some physics and chemistry and yet slowly.
So over a matter of some months and maybe years, this process gives rise to these amazing morphologies.
And in fact, to high level human cognition that has second order metacognition and self-awareness and so on.
And so this is a journey across the Cartesian cut that we all take.
If you follow your own your own development back far enough, you will find this.
And before that, you will find just so it's, quote unquote, just physics.
So it's really interesting to to ask how how this transition works, this this smooth transition.
And so the main points that I'm going to try to transmit today are these first that biology uses a kind of multiscale competency architecture of nested problem solvers.
And that navigation is a really central concept to try to understand navigation spaces in particular is a central concept to try to understand this.
I'm going to claim that goal directedness is a is a critical invariant for recognizing building and
relating to various unconventional agents.
And I'll describe a kind of cognitive boundary model for the scaling of goals.
I'm going to spend about half the talk showing you one specific example in detail, which is this idea that pattern formation biological pattern formation is literally the behavior of a collective intelligence of cells in a space known as more for space.
And I'm going to show you that bioelectrical networks are the proto cognitive medium, the ancestor of brain function.
And this this idea actually has some very practical impacts on biomedicine.
This is not just sort of philosophy, this has very specific applications.
And in the end, I'm going to show you how synthetic bioengineering provides a really astronomically large option space for new bodies and new minds that don't have standard evolutionary backstories.
So we'll get to that towards the end.
So single cells have some really interesting spatial competencies that we can start off by thinking about.
So this is a diatom. This is a single cell in that particular very particular structure is something that it can reliably acquire.
This is a collection of several acetabularia algae.
Each one of these things is, in fact, a single cell.
It has one nucleus.
The whole thing is maybe, you know, six or seven centimeters long.
It has some roots.
It has a stock.
It has a cap here.
The whole thing is just one cell.
And so this is quite interesting to ask how it is that a single cell can have such such profound morphological differentiation.
But these these competencies are not only spatial.
They are also behavioral.
And so what you're seeing here is a slime mold.
This is a physarum polycephalum.
It is the whole thing is one cell.
It can be quite you can grow to be very large, but the whole thing is one cell.
And so when you place it in the middle of this this Petri dish, the little white circles are glass discs.
There's nothing.
There's no food.
There's no chemicals.
They're completely inert glass.
So what it will do as it grows during the first few hours, it sort of grows evenly outward like this.
And what it's doing during this time is sending out vibrations into the medium.
It pulses and sends vibrations into the medium, reading back the vibrations that that return.
So it's almost a kind of sonar.
It's sensing sensing the properties of the medium.
And by doing this, it can actually build a map of its environment and then reliably make its way over to the heavier mass.
So it can reliably detect three discs over one and you can all sorts of fun experiments of stacking them on on top of each other and distributing them.
But it has an amazing ability to sense the mass in its vicinity and to make both morphogenetic and behavioral decisions based on that information.
Okay, so you can you can see this this cell navigating in this in the space according to the to the biomechanical information that it has.
So I'm going to show you four basic things today.
So, so first, I'm going to try to introduce some some biology that you may or may not have seen before designed to really kind of stretch our idea of what is an organism.
What is a mind, what does it mean to navigate space and so on, and then then we'll get into this very specific examples of by electricity and morphogenesis, and then we'll talk about some of these novel organisms.
So the kind of the traditional view is of these discrete static natural kinds, you have a particular animal, maybe you have a rat that you're studying in a maze or a human subject or whatever you have, and that's, you know, that's kind of that's kind of your unit.
But I want to I want to go beyond this, this sort of garden of Eden view and really emphasize that agents that do these intelligent things are incredibly plastic.
So here's one familiar example.
Here, we start with a caterpillar.
This is a creature that lives in a in a largely two dimensional world that crawls around on flat surfaces that choose leaves, and it has a brain appropriate for that purpose.
It has to turn into a butterfly which is going to live in a very much a three dimensional world that has to fly it has to drink nectar.
And in and it needs a completely different brain.
This is a soft bodied robot.
This is a hard body that needs a controller suitable for hard kinds of bodies.
And so in between what happens is during this process, the brain is largely largely destroyed.
Most of the connections are broken down.
Most of the cells die and and the new brain is rebuilt during the lifetime of the organism.
So, you know, this this this this kind of change makes the confusion of puberty seem like real child's play, you know, in the sense that this is a single agent radically changing its its its brain and its body.
And the amazing thing about it is that memories that the caterpillar acquires are retained in the moth or butterfly.
This has been shown to despite the despite the disaggregation of the brain, actually some information is able to make it across.
In fact, this can be even more radical.
These are these are planarium.
These are flat worms, and you'll see a lot more about them in this talk.
The planaria regenerate any part of their body.
So you cut them into pieces. The record is something like 275 pieces.
Each piece regrows exactly what's missing, including the brain, and you get perfect little worms.
So James McConnell back in the 60s made an observation and it was, you know, quite controversial at the time, but we repeated it and actually discovered he was he was absolutely right.
What happens is that if you if you train these planaria to recognize a particular region of their environment, let's say one with these little little bumps laser etched into it as the place where they get fed.
You can then amputate the head and the brain.
I mean, these animals have a true centralized brain, amputate the head and the brain, leave the tail.
The tail sits there for eight or nine days doing pretty much nothing.
Eventually, it grows a new, fresh brain, and somehow that information is imprinted onto this new brain, and these animals show show retention of that of that memory.
So the information moving through the body being imprinted from from one tissue onto another is something that we really need to start to understand.
And in fact, beyond beyond those kind of experiments, you can do this in vertebrates.
We did this in a tadpole.
So this is a tadpole of the frog Xenopus laevis.
Here's the brain.
Here are the nostrils.
Here's the mouth, the gut and the tail.
One thing you'll notice is that what we've done is we've prevented the normal eyes from forming.
We've put an ectopic eye on the tail.
So this is an eye that forms on the tail.
And the amazing thing about these animals is that with no long, in fact, with no period of evolutionary adaptation to this new configuration, they can see perfectly well out of these eyes.
So we've made a device that tests them on visual training cues and sort of automates the same thing we use to test the planarian memory.
It's an automated behavior testing device.
And what we found is that this eye finds itself in a completely novel environment surrounding my muscle instead of near the brain, puts out an optic nerve.
That optic nerve might connect to the spinal cord.
It does not go up to the brain.
The brain that evolved for tracking visual data from these two locations suddenly gets information from some weird itchy patch of tissue on its tail.
No problem. It recognizes that as visual data and these animals behave quite well in in learning assays.
So so navigating navigating your world with a radically different configuration of sensory and and processing organs.
So what we really see in biology is that not only are we nested dolls structurally.
I mean, we all everyone knows that groups consist of individuals made of organs, tissues, cells, and so on.
But actually, each one of these levels has competency.
It solves problems in its own space.
And there are lots of different kinds of spaces and that multi scale architecture, which is which is kind of unique.
It's something that in in engineering, we're still really not not able to recapitulate.
Although we're getting there shows competency in many, many different spaces.
Now, now, the one thing I'd like to I'd like to do fundamentally is to generalize this idea of being able to perform intelligently in some space.
So typically, typically we think about spaces.
So behavior moving the body in three dimensional space.
So it's very easy for us to recognize intelligence in those spaces, because all of our sense organs point outward.
And from the time you were very little, you were collecting data on object medium sized objects moving at medium speeds around you in three dimensional space.
And and we know how to recognize, you know, birds and mammals and other things be behaving intelligent.
What we don't have are senses that directly show us, for example, imagine that you had a you were born with a sense that where you could actually feel your blood chemistry, all the different things going on in your blood physiology and all of the things that your liver, pancreas and other organs were doing.
In that case, we would have a training set that would allow us to understand intelligent navigation of other spaces.
So that would be physiological space, so the space of physiological parameters.
It might be a transcriptional space, so the space of gene expression, all the different gene expression domains, or, in fact, more for space.
This is the space of all possible anatomical configurations.
We'll talk more about that.
I want to show you and and and this this the the the fact that we're not familiar with these other spaces means that when we make claims about the cognitive level or the intelligence level of other systems.
We're really taking an IQ test ourselves.
What we're really saying is this is what we've recognized the system to be doing, but we can't really assume that that we're smart enough to know exactly what it's doing and what it's solving in all of the different spaces.
I want to show you a simple example.
Again, these are plenty.
These are the planaria and what we found is that if we put planaria into a solution of barium chloride.
So barium is a nonspecific potassium channel blocker.
It prevents these cells from exchanging potassium with the outside world.
So when you do this, literally their heads explode.
Okay, their heads just overnight.
They blow up.
But the amazing thing is that if you keep the rest of the worm in barium over the next couple of weeks, they regenerate.
They grow a brand new head and the new head does not care about barium whatsoever.
The new head is barium adapted.
That's kind of amazing.
And so we asked a simple question.
We just looked at the transcriptomes of naive worms versus barium adapted heads.
And we just asked, well, what gene expression is different?
Okay, what's different about these barium adapted heads?
And one thing we found is that there's only a handful of genes.
There's less than a dozen genes that are in fact different.
And so this this system is able to figure out which genes to up and down regulate so that it can do its business without being able to pass potassium properly.
But the incredible thing about this is that barium is not anything that planaria ever see in the wild.
This is completely a completely unnatural novel stressor.
So it's implausible to think that at some point there was evolutionary pressure to develop a response to barium.
So what you're really talking about here is you're in that you're in the space of gene expression, which is, you know, let's say if they have 20,000 genes, it's a massively, you know, a very high dimensional space.
And you need to walk in that space to find the exact genes that are going to solve your physiological stressor.
Now, you don't have time to sort of randomly flip genes on and off, first of all, because it'll it'll most likely kill you before you find the good concentration, the good combinations.
Also, also, there's no there's no time for that these cells don't turn over that fast it's not like a bacterial evolutionary system.
So it's still very much an open question how how do they navigate this this transcriptional space to solve these kinds of solve these kinds of problems.
So this this this to me is is is very much an example of of intelligence in the sense of problem solving taking what you already might know.
Maybe there's information about what to do in a case of epileptic seizures or so on, and bringing it to a new a new scenario.
And so so I've been working on this on this framework.
Now it's called TAME for it stands for technological approach to mind everywhere.
And the goal of this framework is to be able to recognize, create and relate to truly diverse intelligences.
So we need to handle, of course, the things we're familiar with birds, primates, and so on, but also weird colonial organisms and swarms and things like that.
Of course, all the new things that are being produced by synthetic morphology and synthetic biology approaches and possible exo biological agents, because studying just the natural systems that are that are that are here on Earth.
And making conclusions about biology from them is a little bit like testing your theory on the same data set that that created it right it's all just an end of one pass through through phylogenetic space.
So, so I tend to think about all kinds of unconventional different different types of embodiments, whether they be evolved design, whatever, and really think about this kind of this is a scale by Rosenbluth Wiener and Bigelow.
Looking at all the different kinds of behaviors that one might have in one space notice that it says nothing about what it's made of it doesn't doesn't say anything about having brains or being a specific kind of organism or scale, temporarily or whatever it's, it's all it's all very functional so this is this is this is how we think about things in my group.
And the key to this framework is that it has to move experimental work forward it has to enable new capabilities.
And i'm i'm going to show you i'm going to show you how that happens, but first let's just think about this, this one particular kind of intelligence, which I think is super interesting anatomical control as a as a collective intelligence.
First of all, notice the basic thing that needs explaining, which is that we all start life as a collection of embryonic blastomeres.
And these this this this is a cross section through a human torso so this is what what each of us has inside now look at all the incredibly complex invariant order all the all the tissues and structures everything is in the right place next to each other the right orientation size and so on.
So the first question is.
Where is the shape encoded, how do, how, how do these cells know to make exactly this, and you might be tempted to say DNA and genomes.
But we can read genomes now and what we see is that genomes directly code for protein structure, so the genome specifies the micro level hardware that's present in every cell.
But there's nothing directly that you can read out in the genome about the symmetry type of the organism the size the shape how regenerative it's going to be.
This is very much an open problem of how cells know what to what to make and when to stop as workers in regenerative medicine if parts of this are missing we'd like to know how to signal the cells to rebuild to do it again.
And as engineers we'd like to know well what else is possible right given the exact same genome what else can we ask the cells to do, or is this the only thing they could possibly do and.
You can you can sort of visualize forward the end game of this whole field is something like this, it would be an anatomical compiler.
Where you should be able to sit down and draw at the level of anatomy the animal or plant that you want a not not not the pathways not genes but but the actual anatomy.
And, and if we knew what we were doing that we would have a system that.
Do you go with that that compile that description into a set of stimuli that would have to be given to cells to get them to build this particular thing and get in this case a nice three headed planarian.
Now, we don't have anything remotely like this is a very long long term goal, and the reason that it's really important is because if you think about it.
So, pretty much every problem of biomedicine with the exception of infectious disease so birth defects.
Traumatic injury cancer aging degenerative disease.
All of these things boil down to one problem, how do you convince cells to build.
The exact structure that you want if we solve that problem, all of this goes away, we'd be able to fix birth defects regenerate limbs reprogram tumors.
All of this would would go away, but it's a major major problem, why do we not have a an anatomical compiler yet.
So I want to be clear that.
Despite the incredible progress in genetics and molecular biology, we face very fundamental questions that have to do with not not with the molecular mechanisms,
but with the decision making. So here's a simple example.
Here is this is a baby axolotl so axolotls are Mexican salamander.
There's a baby axolotl and baby axolotls have legs.
Here's a tadpole of the frogs and a poslavus.
Tadpoles do not have legs.
So now, in my group, we make something called a frogolotl.
So this is a half, it's a chimera, half axolotl, half frog.
You can mix the cells, they cooperate with each other just fine, they make something, a frogolotl.
Now, I ask a simple question. You've got the genome to the axolotl, you've got the genome to the frog.
How come we don't have any models that tell us whether frogolotls will have legs?
We have no idea from that information whether frogolotls are going to have legs or not.
If they do have legs, whether those legs will be made of axolotl cells or also include frog cells.
We have no idea, even though you've got the genetic information.
So it's really important to start to understand the algorithms, because where biomedicine is right now is that we're very good at manipulating molecules and cells and getting information like this, which gene and protein talk to, which other gene and protein.
We are a long way away from actually controlling a large scale form and function.
And in fact, you can think about the kind of parallel journey that the computer science took.
This is what programming looked like in the 40s and 50s, where in order to control the system, you had to physically rewire it, right?
You were pulling wires in and out, you have to rewire it.
Nowadays, for a joke, I say to all my students, you know, you're on your laptop, you're going to go from Microsoft Word to Photoshop.
I want you to get out your soldering iron and start rewiring, you know, start rewiring.
And of course, they all laugh because because nowadays we don't need to do that.
We understand that if your hardware is good enough, it's reprogrammable with stimuli, with inputs, with experiences, not rewiring.
But of course, modern molecular medicine is all about the hardware.
We're all we're all very excited about genomic editing and protein pathways and single molecule approaches.
And so I think the reason that we are still roughly where computer science was in the in the 50s is because we are we've been neglecting one important aspect, and that is multi scale intelligence and biology.
Now, what do I mean by intelligence?
I mean what William James meant, which is the ability to reach the same goal by different means.
And when when we talk about pattern and anatomy, when I talk about goals, I mean regions of Morpheus space.
Now, what's Morpheus space? Morpheus space is the the space of all possible configurations of some particular structure.
So if you're looking at snail shells, for example, there are three parameters that you can define and every shell is every every possible snail shell is some point within this Morpheus space.
And this is this is an idea that's very that's very old.
In fact, Darcy Thompson in the 40s had this interesting example in his in his book on growth and form where he noticed that if you just deform certain animal shapes placed on a grid, you apply specific deformations to the grid.
What you get are other other species that do exist.
Now, at the time, there was no molecular mechanism, of course, no, and there was nothing really, you know, really known about this.
But I think I think now we can we can we can do some some very interesting things with this idea.
So navigating these spaces, changing your body shape to move from one region to another is not trivial, because there may be local minima, there may be barriers, there may be all kinds of things.
So that that's the task that we face as as as morphogenetic agents.
Now, embryogenesis is very good at this that they're they're it's extremely reliable.
So you start off in as this, you know, as this kind of pattern, and eventually you end up here and that's that's generally very low, very low error.
But we can already see actually that that this process is not simply a kind of pre-programmed hardwired walk in more of a space because we can deviate in the in the middle.
So, for example, we can take this nice human embryo divided in half, literally cut it in half.
And what you get are not to half organisms, you get to perfectly normal monozygotic twins.
This is where twins come from. And so this is a regenerative event where each saw each half of this embryo basically realizes that it's actually not where it's supposed to be in more for space.
And and it needs to regenerate the other half in order to make the correct changes to get to its goal and where it needs to go.
So this is not just embryonic, for example, back to this, this, the salamander, this, this axolotl.
These guys regenerate their limbs, their eyes, their jaws, their spinal cords, portions of their heart and brain, their ovaries, they're incredibly regenerative as adults.
And what happens is that you can amputate, for example, this limb at different positions, no matter where you cut, the cells will very quickly grow, they will grow exactly what's needed to make a normal axolotl limb.
And then they stop. So this is a kind of example of anatomical homeostasis.
They will continue working from wherever starting position until they get to the till they get to where they're going.
Parenthetically, this is not just for for for for frogs and for, you know, axolotls and worms.
The human liver, of course, is regenerative. Even the ancient Greeks knew that I have no idea how they knew that, but it seems like they did.
Deer every year regenerate massive amounts of bone up to a centimeter and a half of new bone per day bone vasculature innovation skin.
And even human children below a certain age can regenerate their fingertips.
If you just leave it alone, it will basically regrow cosmetically a very, very nice outcome.
So we have we have some some ability to to improve our position in more of a space.
So one of the most amazing things about it is that is as a as a body, as a as a living creature, you can't count on your environment.
You can't count on in other words, you can't count on the environment being the same as it was before.
You can't count on not being perturbed during the developmental process, maybe physiologically, maybe metabolically, maybe with a parasite or a teratogen.
So you can't count on that and you still need to get your job done.
In fact, you can't even count on your own parts being what you expected them to be.
Now, of course, we don't have any machines that can do this, that can they can repair themselves after damage or put themselves together with diverse parts here.
This is this is one of my favorite examples of all time.
This is a cross section through a newt kidney tubule.
So so here's the lumen of the tubule needs that these are the cells that make up the tubule.
Normally, it's, let's say, around eight cells that work together to form this kind of tubule.
One thing you can do is you can you can make you can make these cells what's called polyploid, which means they have extra genetic material.
Amazing thing, number one, with the excess genetic material, you still get a perfectly normal newt.
No problem that there are all kinds of extra information around and no problem.
But what does happen is that the cells get much bigger.
And as the cells get physically bigger, fewer of them are needed to make the exact same shape lumen.
Now, that's that that's amazing thing.
Number two is that these cells, the number of these cells will actually scale to their correct size so that you all you get the same final outcome with different numbers of cells.
The most amazing thing is that when you make these cells absolutely gigantic so that only one cell is big enough to make the whole lumen.
What it will do is it will no longer cooperate with other cells.
One cell will bend around itself, making the exact same lumen.
Now, the incredible thing about that is this is a different molecular mechanism.
This was cell to cell communication. This is cytoskeletal bending.
And so what happens is that this is a kind of a kind of top down kind of top down causation where in service of a large scale anatomical spec, meaning having the correct lumen, you can call up different molecular mechanisms to get the job done.
So this, again, sticking with this this theme of intelligence as the ability to handle novelty in terms of getting to where you're going from diverse starting positions with perturbations, both external and internal, you know, your own parts are getting are changing.
Can you still do what you need to do? And all of this is described in some of these papers.
And then and then the final thing is that your your walk through more for space doesn't even have to be the same path.
So here, for example, here's a here's a frog frogs normally do not regenerate their legs.
As I'll tell you momentarily, we have figured out a way to make them regenerate their legs.
And when they do. So this is a pretty good frog leg regeneration.
You can see here it's got the it's got the toes, the toenails, the webbing. I mean, everything's good.
But in fact, the way it got here is not at all how frogs normally regenerate their limbs.
They normally develop their limbs. So normal frog limb morphogenesis is here.
You make these things and then you sort of make that you kill off the cells in the middle to make the path of the paddle.
This is this grows in a completely different way.
You've got the you've got the middle, this kind of middle stock here with a toenail and then the toes sort of come off to the side.
It looks much more like a plant. So it takes a different path through more for space, but it ends up in the same place.
So all of this all of this is is is is back to illustrating some of these amazing abilities of the cells to to to to to navigate.
And so one very kind of very, very canonical example of this that we discovered a few years ago is is this.
So here's a tadpole. Here's the gut, the brain, the nostrils and the eyes here.
This tadpole needs to become a frog in order to for a tadpole face to be a frog face.
Things have to move. So the jaws have to move. The eyes have to move forward.
Everything has to move. And it used to be thought that this process was hardwired because if you're a standard tadpole and you want to be a standard frog.
So all you have to remember is which direction and by how much every piece of the face moves.
What we did and we suspected that there was more intelligence to this process than that.
And so we did an experiment. We we created so-called Picasso frogs.
And so these are tadpoles in which everything is messed up the eyes on the side of the head.
The jaws are off to the side and the nostrils are too far back.
I mean, everything is in the wrong position. And we found that these animals still largely make pretty normal frogs
because all of these pieces will move in novel paths.
In fact, sometimes they go too far and have to double back to give you a normal frog face.
So what the genetics gives you is not some hardwired system that always moves in the same way.
What it specifies is a really interesting error minimization machine that however you started off with, obviously with some limits,
will try to minimize the error and get to the correct final shape.
If we had a robotic swarm, a collection of robots that was able to do this, we would we would call this a plan.
We would we would call this a prize winning example of collective intelligence.
We don't have such a such a technology yet.
So so so we started trying to understand this process.
How how does all this work? And so to the standard feed forward kind of open loop process of developmental biology that that you that you would read about in class,
where there are genes, they make proteins, there's some the proteins and track via some physics and chemistry, and then there's this emergent outcome.
We add to this these feedback loops whereby this is actually a homeostatic system of that if that anatomy is disrupted in some way by injury by by by
by injury by mutations by teratogens by parasites, whatever, then these feedback loops will kick in to try to minimize error, the cells will do what they can to try to get back to the correct shape.
It's a thing we think about your thermostat, it's a basic homeostatic circuit.
Now, on the one hand, this is pretty, pretty expected biologists know all about feedback loops and so on.
On the other hand, there are two kind of weird, weird and unusual things here.
The first is that every homeostatic process has to have a set point.
So if you're going to try to get back to where you need to be, you have to remember where the right where the right position is.
You have to store a set point. We're used to thinking about scalars, single numbers as set points.
So temperature, pH, things like that. But in this case, the set point is a some sort of a large scale geometry.
It's a it's a descriptor of some some kind of coarse grain descriptor of an anatomy.
So it's a complex data structure.
And in general, you know, biologists don't love to think about goal directed processes.
The idea is they're supposed to be emergence and kind of emergent complexity.
But this idea that things are working towards a goal the way that any navigational system fundamentally does is really not something that is is very comfortable, certainly for molecular biology.
So how would something like this? How would something like this work?
How could we have a navigating system that that can can have goals in anatomical space?
And so here's where we start to think about bioelectricity, because our best example of a mechanism that allows us to navigate space towards goals is the brain.
And in the brain, we know roughly what the architecture looks like.
There are cells that communicate with other cells and networks.
These cells have ion channels. So these little proteins that help set a voltage to the cell.
And that voltage may or may not be communicated to its neighbors through these little gap junctions.
These are like like electrical synapses that allow electrical information to pass back and forth.
And so that's the hardware of the brain. And what that hardware enables is a kind of software that, among other things, navigate spaces.
So here's a zebrafish. This is a movie taken by by by this group here that shows all the electrical activity in the living zebrafish brain.
And so the commitment of neuroscience is that if we understood how to decode this information, we would be able to know what the cognitive content of this of this brain was.
So so the memories, the preferences, the goals, whatever else the system was going to do, we should be able to decode it.
So this is this is that cycle that's called neural neural decoding. Right.
We should be able to understand what what all these patterns mean.
Well, it turns out that this is not just for brains. This is an extremely ancient system.
All the cells in your body have ion channels. Most cells have gap junctions with each other.
And what we might be able to do is just like neuroscientists, we might be able to extend this whole scheme to ask,
what are your tissues thinking about at any point in time, specifically to read the electrical?
So this is a this is a time lapse of an early frog embryo.
The colors are a fluorescent dye reporting voltage the same way that we did here, that was done here with these with the zebrafish.
And we might be able to decode this information to ask, what are the targets in anatomical amorphous space?
What is this thing going to build? And so there's this there's this amazing isomorphism between the story of the brain where you've got you've got the hardware and the software.
And there's various experiences and various other ways that this software gets modified.
The hardware basically just gets built by in development.
And what what the brain does is it controls muscles to move your body in three dimensional space.
Now, that's a pretty cool trick. Where did it learn this trick?
Well, evolutionarily, this is exactly the same as something that was going on long before brains appeared, which is this exact same system.
But it used to be for moving the body configuration in more for space before there were nerves and muscles.
The cells needed to talk to each other and process information to get around in more for space.
And so we've argued in this in this paper that basically neural neural electricity is just the evolutionary pivot across spaces from more for space to three dimensional space of a very, very ancient system for processing information long before brains arose.
So so so in my group, we then we we were thinking about this and we asked this question, okay, if that's if that's if that's how it works.
Could we make some tools to read and write this electrical information and to really understand how it's navigating that that that shape change space.
So we developed some of the first tools to read and write information into non brain tissues.
So, of course, these die. So these are voltage sensitive fluorescent dyes that report all the electrical conversations that these cells are having with each other.
So here's a time lapse of these cells figuring out who's going to be left, right, dorsal, ventral.
So so all of this is is you're looking at these cells having those conversations.
We do a lot of computational modeling to ask, OK, given where the ions are going, how can we predict these voltages?
I'm going to show you two patterns. Here's a here's a time lapse.
It happens to be grayscale, but it's the exact same idea.
Here's a time lapse of a frog embryo putting its face together.
And what you will see in this, this is one frame out of that video.
What you will see is that this is this is something we call the electric face discovered by my colleague, Danny Adams.
When she was in my group doing this profiling, she found that here's here's a particular frame from that from that video where you can see the the animals right eye, the mouth, the the the placards.
All of this is already demarcated before the genes start to come on and really pattern the face.
This is a bioelectric pre pattern of what the future face is going to look like.
And I'm showing you this one because it's so simple.
It literally looks like a face, right?
There are other patterns that are much more complex that you can't really just sort of visually decode.
But this one is very is very clear. This is the memory of what a tadpole face is going to look like.
And if you move this, if you if you disrupt this electrical pattern, the gene expression will change and the organogenesis will change.
And we'll I'll show you the show you examples of that momentarily.
So so this is a this is a an endogenous pattern that is required for normal development.
In fact, human channelopathies of the human patients that have craniofacial defects often have mutations and ion channels that screw up this pattern.
Now, that's so that's a normal pattern here's a pathological pattern.
We've put in a human oncogene.
These cells will make a tumor, but even before the tumor becomes apparent, you can already see this bioelectrical, aberrant bioelectrical signature of these cells basically disconnecting from the rest of the tissue and going to their unicellular ancient behavior mode where the rest of the body is just environment as far as they're concerned.
So so so so one one set of tools is to track these bioelectrical changes.
Now, here's another important set of tools to actually start to be able to to write new information into it.
And the way we do that, we don't use any applied electric fields. There are no waves. There are no magnets.
There's no electromagnetic radiation. What we do is we do exactly what neuroscientists do, which is we modify the endogenous mechanisms by which cells establish electrical signals.
So either ion channels, we can open them, we can close them, we can use light or drugs to do that in the gap junctions, the the electrical synapses.
So we can determine which cells talk to each other cells by opening and closing these little gap junctions.
It's very telling that all of the tools of neuroscience work in other cell types.
Basically, the tools can't tell the difference, right?
This this distinction between neuroscience and other cells in your body is completely artificial.
And it's, you know, it's a consequence of humans trying to parse the world. It's not nature doesn't doesn't obey that distinction.
So what can you do with this? OK, I've been talking about these this electrical information. What what what does it actually do?
Well, here's here's a here are a few examples.
One thing you can do is you can take this this tadpole and I've shown you the electric face.
And so we asked the question, OK, if now now that we know that there's a particular voltage state that kickstarts eye development, could we simply reproduce that somewhere else?
So we took an ion channel RNA that we knew was going to set the same voltage state.
We injected it into precursor cells that are going to give rise to the gut.
And sure enough, those cells can form a complete eye.
They the eyes that are formed will have all the right layers, retina, nerve, you know, optic nerve, all that lens.
And and and they can be formed anywhere.
They can be formed anywhere anywhere in the body as long as the cells get the right pattern that tells them what organ to make.
Now, notice two very interesting things here. One is that this instruction is highly modular.
We provided a very small piece of information, just a voltage pattern.
We certainly did not give it all the information needed to specify an eye.
Eyes have many cell types. They're very complex. There's no we have no idea how to micromanage the creation of an eye.
But what we provided was a kind of a subroutine call, a signal that says build an eye here and the cells do.
That's the first thing. The second amazing thing is that there are two levels of instruction here.
One is us instructing the cells build an eye.
But here what you can see is this is a lens sitting out in the flank of a of a of a salad table somewhere.
And the blue cells are the ones that carry this ion channel that we put in there's not enough of them to make a good lens.
So what they've done is recruit their neighbors. This is why at the very beginning, I pitched this idea that frog a lottles might have legs that consist also of of of frog cells.
Why would frog cells build a leg when when they normally don't?
It's because cells have the ability to instruct each other about what to build.
And so these cells right here, they they've been told to make an eye, but there's not enough of them.
And they know that. And so they they recruit a bunch of their neighbors, these brown cells that we never touched.
There's that they're not. These cells are completely wild type.
And yet they're participating in making this ectopic lens out in the tail of a tackle.
So so there's this amazing ability to to instruct and for the cells to then instruct each other.
Now, what else can we make? Well, we can make it using the same methodology by manipulating these ion channels.
We can make otisists, which are balanced organs like inner ear type of organs.
We can make complete beating hearts. So so ectopic hearts.
We can make extra forebrain and then you can see you can ask if these animals are any smarter than the normal tackles.
We can make ectopic limbs. So you can see here all kinds of extra extra legs that we can form.
And we can even make fins.
Now, this last one's kind of weird because tadpoles, of course, aren't supposed to have fins.
We'll get to that momentarily.
But what you can see is that by changing the bioelectrical pattern using using manipulation of ion channels,
you can tell this collective where to go in more for space, meaning what types of organs they should be building.
You're not micromanaging the specifics.
Each step that they take, they figure that out on the road.
In fact, we have no idea how to how to do that for any of these complex organs.
But you can you can indicate regions about where it is that they should be going.
And this has has biomedical implications.
So frogs, I told you, unlike salamanders, do not regenerate their legs.
So if a leg is amputated 45 days later, there's nothing.
What we've done is come up with a drug cocktail that targets ion channels that induces leg regeneration.
And so you can see here 45 days later, there's already a nice, a nice leg forming.
The leg is touch sensitive.
It's motile.
It's it's functional.
It has a pretty good eventually has a pretty good final final pattern.
And so we're in the process of translating that to mammals.
Hopefully this will work.
Hopefully this will work.
I have to do a disclosure here because this is a commercial venture.
Now, Morphocuticals Inc is a spinoff between myself and Dave Kaplan, where David's lab makes
these bioreactors that provide that have an aqueous environment for the wound.
And then we provide the ion channel and other types of payload in there to hopefully get leg
regeneration in mammals.
So this is a clinically kind of, you know, clinically relevant approach.
So I want to switch from this now to show you another kind of amazing example of what
bioelectricity does.
This is these a planarium.
So, so I've already told you they, they have incredible amounts of regenerative ability
because of that.
They're actually immortal.
There's no such thing as an old planarium.
They do not age.
So these animals pretty much go on forever.
And, and, and that's because of this incredible ability to continuously replenish and regenerate
to keep their, keep their pattern.
Perfect.
So I want to show you, I want to show you an example.
This is, this is a planarian one head, one tail.
You cut off the head and the tail.
You got this middle fragment.
We check, we check the, the gene expression.
Yep.
Anterior genes are in the head, no anterior genes in the tail.
That's fine.
And 100% of the time it makes this normal offspring.
So, so one head, one tail.
Okay.
That's fine.
That's fine.
That's fine.
That's fine.
That's fine.
That's fine.
That's fine.
That's fine.
That's fine.
Now here, what I'm going to show you is that here, here's this, here's a planarian,
one head, one tail.
Again, anterior genes where they're supposed to be.
But when I cut this guy, he makes a two headed form.
I just told you that this process was very reliable.
Why in the world would a one headed animal make a two headed?
And this isn't Photoshop.
These are real, you know, real live animals.
So, so here, here are heads at both ends.
Well, it's because in the meantime, we found that there's an electrical circuit that actually helps this
tissue.
And what you can do in the meantime is take this one headed animal.
And you can look at the electrical pattern.
The electrical patterns is one, one head, one tail.
And we can alter that electrical pattern to say, no, you're going to be a proper worm should have two heads.
Now you can see it's kind of a mess.
The technology is still being worked out, but the, but, but it's very clear.
We can, we can, we can impose this pattern.
This is two heads.
And when you cut that animal, boom, that's what the cells make.
Now, this is really critical to understand.
This bioelectric pattern is not a map of this two headed guy.
This bioelectrical pattern is a map of this one headed animal into which we incepted a false memory of what planaria are supposed to look like.
And they sit there, this memory sits there latent doing nothing until you injure them.
Once you injure this animal, that is when they will, the cells will pay attention to this pattern and they will go ahead and make a two headed animal.
So if you're wondering where counterfactual where the ability to consider counterfactuals came from this kind of mental time travel where you can consider things that have memories and have predictions about things that are not happening right now.
Now, this is perhaps the, the sort of basal precursor of that ability in Morpha space.
This, this animal has a representation in Morpha space of where it will go if it gets injured at a future time.
Not what's happening right now.
That's not, this is not where I am right now.
This is where I'm going to go if I get injured.
Now, why do I keep calling this thing a memory?
I keep calling it a memory because if you take these two headed animals and simply recut them again in plain water, no more manipulations of any kind.
They will continue to reset to, to rebuild two headed animals and forever, as far as we can tell.
The, the, the question of how many heads a planarian has is not strictly determined by the genome because we didn't touch the genome.
The genome is wild type. There's nothing, there's no genomic editing here.
The, the, that information is sitting in an electric circuit. The default, the genetically set default is one head, but it's easily changed.
And in fact, we can now, well, now, as I say, it's easy. It took us 10 years to, you know, to figure it out.
But, but in fact, it's, it's quite readily done. And in fact, you can, you can set it back.
You can set it back to being one headed by, by again, targeting the information in that electrical circuit.
The first time I showed, I showed these data, somebody stood up at a conference and said, well, that's impossible.
Those animals can't exist. So I, I always bring this video so everybody can see what, what the second and third generation of, of these guys look like.
So, so this, this has all the properties of memory. It's long-term stable. It's rewritable.
It's got a little bit of liability. So it's rewritable. It's got latency or conditional recall.
So you can have a single body can have memories of, of what a planarian is supposed to look like that aren't true right now.
And it has discrete possible outcomes. So one of the things that we're doing now is, is really trying to integrate models of the physiological state space of, of this animal.
That where, where the circuit, the electrical circuit has, has a state space where there are attractors that correspond to one heads, two heads, no heads, and so on.
And merge that with models of connectionist, artificial neural network type of processes where, where we already know how to build networks that, for example, do pattern completion.
And they have a memory of what the pattern should be. And if part of that part of that pattern is missing, they can reproduce it and so on.
This is all, this is all part of one problem. And, and the key is tying it all together in, with, with these quantitative models that show how this electrical circuit navigates Morpha space.
Now, what I've shown you is that you can tweak that electrical circuit to find an attractor that has two heads instead of one heads.
But what else is there? What else does this space actually have? Let's explore that a little bit.
Well, the first thing you find is that, well, it contains head shapes of other species.
So what you can do is you can take this planarian, cut off the head, perturb the electrical circuit for about 48 hours, then let them, let it go.
And when it finally settles down into the correct attractor, it doesn't always find the right one.
So some percentage of the time it goes back to normal and makes this nice triangular head from D doradocephala.
But sometimes it'll make a round head like this S Mediterranean.
Sometimes it'll make a flat head like this P Felina.
In fact, this is a stochastic process. The frequency of these is proportional to the evolutionary distance between the real the real species that are being mimicked here.
And again, no changes to the genome. There's nothing genetically wrong with these animals, but you can you can find these other attractors.
And it's not just for head shape. It's the shape of the brain.
The distribution of the stem cells become just like these other species.
And it's about they're about 100 to 150 million years distant.
OK, so so you can find those attractors with the exact same genetics.
In fact, you can find shapes that don't that that don't correspond to any real planarian.
As far as we know, you can make these crazy spiky forms.
You can make a different symmetry type.
So there's kind of cylindrical radial symmetry instead of a flat bilateral symmetry.
You can make combinations where where there's a flat worm with a big tube growing out into the third dimension.
And again, nothing wrong with the hardware. There's not no no no mutations.
Another one with the genome. It's exploring the it's bioelectrically exploring the space of where it can be.
And so the idea is what we're doing now is is building these kind of full stack models that that try to integrate all the way from the molecular information about what channels do you have to work with.
So the hardware all the way up through the physiology of, OK, well, what does this mean for the voltage states across the tissue to what does that mean for the identity of different organs along the primary axis to what kind of algorithm is this whole thing is this whole thing implementing such that we could actually understand the algorithm and intervene.
Right. So so make make changes.
And for this, we have we have all kinds of computational platforms such as such as this, which allows you to load up electrical circuits into cells and then simulate simulate tissue and organ level dynamics to understand what the large scale computations are.
And so so just as a simple example, again, of why this is why this is useful and what the what the practical implications of this are.
We use this the strategy to find a technique for repairing birth defects.
So here's a tadpole. Here's the forebrain, midbrain and hindbrain.
If it's exposed to nicotine or various other teratogens, you can see there's massive defects.
So the the brain is basically gone.
The forebrain is basically gone. The midbrain and hindbrain are damaged.
And so what we did is we built this this bioelectrical model that tries to explain how does the brain know what its size and shape should be.
And in cases where, for example, here, this is even worse than a teratogen, we mutated a key neurogenesis gene is a gene called notch.
So this gene is mutated. You can see the forebrain is just gone. The midbrain and hindbrain are a bubble.
These animals have no behavior. They just lay there doing nothing. It's a very strong defect.
But what we found what we did was we asked that model which ion channels would we have to open and close to get back to the correct bioelectrical memory of what a what a correct brain should be.
Basically, how do I find my way back in Morpha space to what a correct brain should be.
And the model made a prediction. We tested that prediction.
It happens to be a an already human approved set of drugs that can do this.
And sure enough, when we did it there, there you go, the the the brain structure comes back, their brain gene expression comes back and their IQ comes back.
So if you actually test them for their learning rates, they're indistinguishable from controls.
Even though they've been exposed to teratogens or they have this really nasty genetic defect, some problems and not all problems, but some problems can be fixed at the level of software.
Sometimes when your hardware isn't quite right, you can make up for it in in software by having a better navigation policy through Morpha space.
So you're not dead and you're not automatically dead in the water if your hardware is a little wonky.
So what that means is we ought to be able to create these pipelines to to and we've already we've already started to help design electroceuticals.
That is, you have some particular problem and you can ask the simulation what type of channel, meaning what drug can I use to get back to my correct bioelectrical pattern?
Fundamentally, this is really the question of how do we exploit this electrical interface that these cells are exposing to us, right, just like neurons do, and people using electrodes and optogenetics and everything else to control brains using this electrical interface.
We can do exactly the same thing to help guide their navigation through Morpha space.
It's a it's a new way of to think about getting making drugs for various disorders of development of injury and the cancer and so on.
Okay, so so I want to just just say a couple of things before I wrap up here.
I want to say a couple of things about the scaling of cognition in this whole in this whole business and then show you some some novel synthetic living machines.
So the first thing I want to point out is that we've been I started out by saying that thinking about fixed standard animals is is kind of limiting, and that's because the border between self and world is is is flexible, it can change.
So so again, here is a and what what unifies all all of these different kinds of weird intelligences are solving problems in Morpha space and in physiological space and so on, is their ability to pursue goals meaning to pursue the right region of that Morpha space.
So this kind of creature, a single cell can have pretty humble little tiny goals right so so on the scale of some number of microns.
It can it can pursue state physiological states so metabolic states and so on, but these cells can cooperate and when they come out when they cooperate they can pursue very large goals.
So building a limb is a huge goal not no individual cell knows what a limb is or how can count fingers or anything like that, but the collective sure can.
The collective will absolutely pursue this particular region of Morpha space, despite all kinds of perturbations and when does it stop it stops when it when it reaches that area.
So when it gets to where it's going and the limits correct that's when it stops.
So there's a scaling of goals here now that happens during evolution.
And as you as you'll see in a minute it also can can happen right in front of your eyes, but the reverse process we're quite familiar with and that's cancer.
So these here are glioblastoma cells human glioblastoma cells and culture cells can defect from this kind of from this kind of situation once they electrically isolate from their neighbors.
Then as far as they're concerned, they're back to they're back to this scenario, the the rest of the body is just external environment to them, their their goals are little tiny goals.
What are the goals of single cell systems?
Well, for every cell wants to become two cells and it wants to go wherever life is good and that's metastasis.
And so that process that shrinking and growing and in fact, these cancer cells are not any more selfish than your normal body cells.
It's just that the self is smaller, right?
A lot of a lot of work in game theory of cancer that talks about selfishness and lack of cooperation.
They're not any more selfish.
It's just that the self towards which they work is just little little tiny self is very small, whereas here, the electrical network is able to bind.
And if people want, I have I have all sorts of stories about what exactly happens when they bind together, but I'll skip that for now for reasons of time.
When when individual cells bind into networks, those networks have a greater ability to to store memory, to have anticipation of future events, to perceive spatial spatial kinds of signals in their environment.
And so the scale grows and the the biomedical implication of this is that if this were if this were true, you should be able to reverse cancer by artificially reconnecting cells to their neighbors.
And in fact, that's what we've that's what we've done.
So so when you have this this nasty oncogene, you can see that in red, it's still here.
You can prevent the tumor from happening by putting in an ion channel that forces these cells to remain in the right bioelectrical state, despite the fact that the oncogene is trying to disassociate them.
And if you do that, the physiology trumps the genetics that will it will these cells will remain even though the oncogene is strongly expressed.
The cells will remain making nice muscle and skin and whatever else it's supposed to make.
So so this this this idea of of looking at the scaling of the self and the scaling of these goals has real practical implications.
And in in my in my model, one of the things that it allows the framework to do is to compare directly very diverse intelligences.
So any intelligence, be it evolved, designed some sort of hybrid, some sort of alien thing and maybe pure software, it doesn't matter.
Any agent has a set that can pursue goals.
You can simply plot the size of those goals.
So so how big are they in space and time? Right.
You might have you might have a tick that only cares about local butyrate concentration, and that's all that it's ever going to care about.
And so it has a tiny little cognitive light cone that allows it to pursue these tiny little goals.
And you or you might have a dog which has a bigger cognitive light cone and has some pretty good memory going backwards as a little bit of anticipation potential forwards.
It's never going to care about what happens to towns over three months from now.
It's impossible that its goal space is simply not that big. Right.
And then you can have humans which uniquely perhaps have have a cognitive light cone that's bigger than their own lifespan.
So the human can comprehend and pursue goals that are that are guaranteed not achievable in your lifetime.
And that for all I know that may drive some interesting psychological pressures that that humans face.
But this idea that that we are all made of a collective of agents, each of these agents is solving problems in its own space.
And within that space, there are differently scaled goals, some some very, very, very modest than some some some massive, you know, some humans are working for world peace.
And then, you know, these kinds of very complex, very large long term things.
So the idea is that in this multi scale system, what happens is that higher levels bend the option space for their subunits.
So so so so in if if if you've got a morphogenetic space that that that that has a tractors for different head shapes, that's because those those bioelectrical states distort the the space of gene expression for their cells such that all the cells need to do is go down their concentration gradients the way they normally do.
They don't have to know where they're going, but in fact, they end up at a very particular morphological outcome because because the higher level has already distorted that space.
And so there are all kinds of interesting work to be done looking at mathematical formalisms from relativity theory and from some other disciplines to look at how and how that works.
And in fact, all that's happening here is the scaling up of goals.
So once you have a single cell that can do this cycle, this this test, measure, act, test, compare, act kind of cycle, let's say, for example, for keeping pH, once you start connecting cells into electrical networks,
now everything scales up, their goals are bigger, their memories are bigger, the the ability to act are bigger.
So this is what evolution is, is, is doing, it's constantly scaling up these these homeostatic units, and it's actually pivoting them through different spaces.
So very simple kinds of organisms.
All they could do is traverse metabolic space to keep alive.
But eventually that works up to physiological spaces, then gene expression becomes a thing.
And so they can work in transcriptional spaces, then multi the complex anatomy.
So so morph a space.
And eventually, when brains and muscles show up, you're in behavioral space and who knows what other spaces there are linguistically and there may be many others.
So just to close off in the last few minutes, I want to I want to show you an example of novelty.
So I've been I've been talking about intelligence and the idea that these all of these different different systems are able to handle novel conditions.
I want to show you an extreme example of that.
So this is this is work that Joshua Bongard's lab and and we are doing in in this new Institute, and we wanted to ask a simple question.
Well, a set of questions.
One is how much how much real time plasticity really is there.
I mean, we've seen that you can get you can get pretty far away from the genomic default.
But what what else can these cells do?
And in fact, when we look at development, normal development, to what extent is it?
Is it fooling us?
What extent are we basically lulled into thinking that because acorns make oak trees and frogs, eggs make make frogs?
To what extent are we really fooled into thinking that that's basically all that they can do?
And so we started asking about, you know, what what might the default competencies of some of these cells and tissues be?
Okay. And so so what we did was was was this simple experiment.
I'm just going to pause.
Oops, I'm going to pause this here.
What we did was a simple experiment where and this all the biology was done by Doug Blackiston in my group and the computer science you're about to see was done by Sam Kriegman.
What we did was we took some skin cells off of a frog embryo and we put those skin cells by themselves in a dish.
So we didn't add anything.
There are no nanomaterials.
There are no genetic circuits being added.
There are no weird trans genes or chemicals.
What we do is subtract.
What do we subtract?
We subtract all this other stuff.
We subtract all their normal neighbors that are normally instructing these cells as to what to do.
And we give them a chance to reboot their multicellularity.
Now, there's all sorts of things they could do.
So so they could just go and die.
Right.
They could spread out and get away from each other.
They could form a flat to two dimensional monolayer the way that cell culture does.
There are many things that could happen.
And so so here's what happens.
We we dissociate these cells.
We put them in this little little depression.
Well, overnight, they sort of come together like this and then they form this little round ball.
This the flashes you're seeing is calcium signaling.
So it's a calcium sensitive dye.
It they they start to sort of signal to each other.
And what they form is something we call Xenobots.
Now, why Xenobots?
Because Xenopus laevis is the name of the frog and and it's a bio robotics platform.
So the way it's the way they're they're swimming is they have little hairs on their surface.
These hairs called cilia are normally used to redistribute mucus on them across the body of the frog.
So here what they've done is they've sort of they've learned to row.
And so and so the cells, the cilia are moving in this thing is propelling itself.
They can go in circles.
They can go straight back and forth like this here.
You can see a bunch of them in their various.
This is just tracking data.
So so these two are interacting.
These are sitting there doing nothing.
This one's going on kind of a longer journey here.
Here's one navigating a maze.
This is still water.
There's no water movement in here, so it moves along.
It takes the corner without bumping into the opposite wall.
And then at some point for reasons that nobody nobody can predict yet.
It decides to turn around and go back where it came from.
So it again goes long does not need to bump into anything to know that it could take a corner here.
And then at this point turns around turns around and goes and goes back.
Okay.
Now, one of the things you can see with this calcium signaling is that they're very active.
This looks very brain like this looks very similar to that zebrafish kind of signaling that that I showed you before, except there's no neurons here.
This is just skin.
Everything that you just saw was 100% skin cells.
There's no there's no brain is no nervous system.
And so not only you know, so who knows where we're still experimenting with like what what might they be saying to each other when they're when they're doing this.
But what one thing you could you can see, they do a couple of interesting things.
One thing they can do is regenerate.
So here's here's one that was basically cut in half.
And now think about think about the force.
Look at that hinge as it as it folds up.
Think about the the force that it takes to to to clamp something shut from 180 degree position.
But it basically folds up right to be back to its to its xenobot shape.
And one of the things we started thinking about is, how can we how can we predict what this kind of system is going to do?
I mean, nobody knew what what they were going to do.
So so Josh Vongard's lab started modeling their their behavior in this kind of simulation.
The simulation can actually tell you what the behavior of different shaped bots is going to be.
And then you can go ahead and micro sculpt them or do various things.
You can see the patterns that this is just a car mine powder on the bottom of the dish.
And these guys sweep it along as they go.
So you can see all the cool patterns that they make as they're navigating.
But but here's something here's something interesting.
If you if you simulate them in an environment with a bunch of loose bricks, what you see is that they tend to they tend to collect them into little piles.
And so what's what might be the significance of that?
Well, it turns out the real bots do exactly that.
And if you provide them, so these are xenobots provided with a bunch of loose skin cells.
So these white dots are just loose skin cells hanging around.
And what you'll see is that these the xenobots will run around.
They will collect either together or individually.
They'll make little piles.
And because this is in a gentle material, right, these cells are not passive.
They once the cells are collected into a pile, what do they make?
They make xenobots.
So this is kinematic self-replication.
These bots make copies of themselves from the loose material in the dish.
We've made it impossible for them to replicate the way that normally frogs reproduce.
So they can't do that.
But within 48 hours, they show us that there's another way to do this that as far as we know, no other animal uses.
It's basically von Neumann's dream, which is machines that will go out and build copies of themselves from parts that they find laying around.
That's what's going on here.
These xenobots build the next generation of xenobots out of these loose cells.
When those mature, guess what they do?
They run around, do exactly the same thing.
You get the next generation and then the next generation after that.
Now, there's no strong heredity here yet, as far as we know.
But and the reason it works is really critical.
The reason it works is the exact same reason that we were able to make xenobots in the first place, because these cells are not passive Legos.
They are in a gentle material that once they get together in a particular group, they know what to do.
They have an innate preference to to make bots.
That's that's why these bots are able to make new bots.
So here's the here's kind of the amazing thing about it is that same genome.
So if you were to sequence a xenobot, all you would ever see is the Xenopus Laevas genome.
You'd have no idea that it was any different.
That same genome can do at least two different life histories.
It can do this. So that's a normal normal Xenopus.
Stages and the normal tackle behavior, or it can do this.
So here's an early Xenobot. Here's a Xenobot at about two months.
It's it has a developmental sequence. It's turning into something.
What is that? I have no idea what that is. There's never been there's never been any Xenobots before.
So it's some kind of novel novel developmental stage.
And eventually they have these these kinds of behaviors.
So we're still working out. We don't know how much cognition they actually have.
Can they live? Can they learn? Can they they have preferences?
What do they react to? We don't know. We're still figuring that out.
But the amazing thing about it is that for most animals, the way they navigate both physical and anatomical space.
When you ask, you know, why do they have a certain number of legs, a certain color, certain behaviors?
The answer is always, well, because for millions of years, the ancestors were selected for this or that.
And everybody else died off. And now this is what you have.
Well, there's never been any Xenobots and there's never been selection to be a good Xenobot.
All of this is created on the fly. This is this is what they do.
They create a coherent organism.
And by the way, if you ask, what do skin cells normally want to do?
You might think that what they normally want to do is to be this like passive two dimensional layer on the outside of an animal to keep out the bacteria.
That isn't what they want to do.
That's what they're bullied into doing by the instructive interactions with the rest of the cells.
If you don't have those cells that this is what they're actually this is their default.
This is actually their default behavior.
So what evolution does is what bioengineers can and will be doing is behavior shaping.
It's figuring out signals to get your agential material, not passive, not a blank slate, but your agential material to do whatever you want to do.
So I'm just going to close up here with with a couple of thoughts.
This is this is just a kind of an overview of this of this framework that that we've been working on is kind of continuum of agency across very diverse implementations.
The idea of scaling of the boundaries of goals for any particular system as a way to compare radically different types of intelligences in different spaces.
Bioelectricity is a particular example, not the only one.
I'm sure there are other ways to tell the story, but bioelectricity is a really great way to look at what is the what is the cognitive medium of a collective intelligence?
And it seems to be electricity in many cases.
And there are all kinds of implications for for evolution, including asking questions about where do these goals come from?
If it's not just selection, where, in fact, do they come from?
And so just to finish up, I want to point out that one of the consequences of the fact that biology can solve problems on the fly and that it's incredibly interoperable is that pretty much any combination of evolved material,
meaning cells or tissues or genes design material, so smart nanomaterials, all kinds of constructs and and software, any combination of these is some viable creature.
And so when Darwin said endless forms, most beautiful impressive being impressed with a variety of biology that he was seeing around.
That's just all of that. Everything on Earth is a tiny corner of this incredibly huge option space, which we're already beginning to explore.
So there are already cyborgs, you know, humans with various implants, both sensory and and effectors.
People can run wheelchairs with their minds and have have all kinds of sensors attached to them.
Hybrots, which are brains driving vehicles instead of biological bodies.
People started a long time ago making making chimeras.
So so mules, right, horses and donkeys make mules.
So so you can start to mix genetic material.
After that, people would make grafts and plants and mix at the cellular level.
Every combination.
We are going to be living in a world where we are surrounded by agents that don't look like anything familiar on the phylogenetic treatment.
And this means that we have massive implications for systems of ethics, because the old traditional framework where you look at something and you ask, where did it come from?
Would it come from a factory or was it was it natural? And what does it look like?
Does it look like a fish, an ape or a human or, you know, or something else?
Those kinds of touchstones are going to be completely useless in deciding how to relate to these beings that are going to be around us in terms of what do we owe them?
What do what can we expect of them?
All of these things we can.
We're not going to be able to rely on familiar categories of where did it come from and how much like a like a human does it, you know, does it look that's going to be gone.
So those things will not survive the next few decades.
So we are going to need to develop novel frameworks because life is so good at navigating these spaces that all of these things are going to be viable.
So I'll just close by saying that all of this is discussed in great detail in various papers.
Anybody just please email me and I'll send you everything.
I want to thank the various intelligent beings that contributed to all the work I showed you.
So all of our postdocs, PhD students, the model systems that we work with, they do all the heavy lifting, all the all the slime molds and the planarian tackles and everything else.
And of course, our funders.
And again, just two disclosures.
So Morphocyticals is a company around limb regeneration and Fauna Systems is a company for Xenobots.
And that's it. Thank you so much.
Thank you for listening.
Thank you.
Thank you.
