All right. Well, thank you. Thank you very much. And thanks for having me at this amazing meeting.
I'm sorry I'm not there in person. And I hope to share some ideas with you today around this
idea of non-neural intelligence. So the details of everything that I'm talking about,
data sets, papers, everything is at this site. And my own personal thoughts on what it might
mean are all here. So the summary that I'm going to try to transmit today are basically
to describe some aspects of biological systems as self-constructing polycomputing agents that
operate in very diverse problem spaces. They navigate these spaces at multiple scales,
which I'll show you examples of, and they form a kind of agential material that is not well
described either by things like the laws of chemistry nor by some of the computational
paradigms that we have today. I'm going to, towards the end, talk about how biology,
emphasizes saliency, not the fidelity of information, because the medium is fundamentally
unreliable. And this has some very important implications for both for engineering, but
also for biology. I'm going to show you examples of how biology makes creative agents, not solutions
to specific problems, as we might think of the evolutionary process. And I'm going to talk
at the end about this idea of emergent cognition, not just emergent complexity. So the talk is in
three parts, a little bit about non-neural problem solving and get us warmed up to think about examples
beyond brains, and then talk about some fundamental principles that are beginning to come to light
about how this works, about intelligence that self-assembles, picks its own goals, and so on.
And then give you some really kind of wild speculations about where some of these things
come from, in addition to evolution and engineering. So the first thing to know about biology is that
the distinction that a lot of people try to make between, let's say, living things or even humans
and then quote-unquote machines is a very tough binary categorization to maintain nowadays. Not only
don't we know from the facts of evolution and developmental biology that we are at the center
of a continuum, a very smoothly changing metamorphosis process that takes us from a single cell all the way
to whatever it is that that we are. But also now with bioengineering of different types, we now have
this other continuum where we can start to make modifications to various degrees because everywhere
along the levels of organization we can add engineered systems to the natural evolved ones. And so what
we really have is a very, a series of intersecting continua and very soft categories where it becomes really
hard to say, you know, whether something is a natural living being or an engineered kind of artifact
and so on. And that's fine. We need to get on board with this. So my framework that I'm working on
is designed to help us recognize, create, and ethically relate to a truly diverse intelligence, regardless
of its composition or of its origin story. So that means, you know, the familiar creatures, of course,
like primates and birds and so on, but also some really weird organisms, colonial kinds of things,
swarms, engineered new life forms that never existed before, AI agents, whether purely software or in
fact embodied and robotic, and maybe someday exobiological agents if we find them. So I would
like to be able to think about all of these things together with the same set of tools. Obviously, I'm not
the first person to try for this. So here's Rosenbluth, Wiener and Bigelow's scale of how passive
matter is able to go up these different sort of phase transitions to get to like human-like
metacognition and so on. And so there are two main purposes of this framework. One is that it has to
move experimental work forward. So I'm not interested in just philosophy. I want these things to have
impact in discovery, impact in biomedicine and so on. So new capabilities, and in fact, better ethics to
enable us to relate to novel beings that we're not really used to thinking about. And so this is the
first version of that framework is described here. So I like to think about a kind of axis of
persuadability. So if you think about all these different kinds of agents that I talked about,
what do they have in common? How can we start to think about them? Well, one way to start to think
about them is what would it take for another agent? So this is very much an observer-focused
observer-relative view. What would it take for that agent to interact with them? Maybe hardware
modification is the only way, but maybe some tools from control theory and cybernetics where you can reset
the goals and not micromanage the hardware quite as much, but maybe even better for some tools from
behavioral science where you can train the system and really don't need to necessarily know much about
what's going on under the hood. And then of course, all the way up here, you're entering very kind of
very complex relationships where you're communicating and your agency is benefiting as much as you're
putting out, which is not the case here. So this kind of spectrum, and this is not tied to any specific
substrate or any specific origin. And the idea is that when you have a given system, you can't have
philosophical preconceptions about where it must fit. You actually have to do experiments. That is,
this is very much an empirical science where you make a hypothesis about where your system sits,
you then use the relevant tools, see how that goes for you. And then we can all see whether that is an
appropriate guess as to the level of agency of your system. So what we focus on in my framework is,
first of all, I'm making this very much a, not being tied to old philosophical categories,
as in when people say category errors and so on, really, we just have to do the experiments and find
out. And as I will show you, we get lots of surprises. And very much an observer-centered stance.
The question is, what is it, how much efficacy do you gain by using a certain set of tools when
you interact with a system in a certain way? So we all know that Turing was interested in different
kinds of embodiments of mind. And so kinds of problem solving machines and intelligence through
reprogrammability and plasticity. But one of the other things he did was to write a paper on the
chemical basis of morphogenesis, the self-assembly of chemical gradients from disorder into order.
And so you might wonder why would somebody who was interested in computation and programmability and
intelligence and so on, why would he be studying something like this? And I think that's because he
saw a very profound truth, which is that the self-assembly of minds and the self-assembly of
bodies are fundamentally a very parallel process. There are some really strong symmetries between
these two processes. So what I'm going to do next is to talk about a few unique features of the
biological substrate. We'll take a brief tour of what I call the agential material of life, and we'll look at
some of these examples. First of all, we all take this journey. So you start off as a quiescent oocyte,
a little blob of chemistry and physics, and you might look at it and you might say, well, there's
clearly no intelligence there. It's just a little physical system. The molecular biologists are doing
fine in characterizing how it works and so on. And then through a very soft and gradual process,
something like this or even something like this results, there is no magic point here. There's
no light lightning flash where you go from physics to having a real mind. So if you think that these
kinds of systems have intelligence and whatever else you might want to say about first person
perspective and consciousness, I won't say much about that today. But whatever it is, you have to be
able to tell a story of scaling because we know where it comes from. It comes from here. So somehow from
here to here, that is during this process, there's a scale up of the capabilities that are present here
that give rise to this. So now we know we have to tell a story of scaling and transformation.
But at least we're a true unified intelligence, right? We have this nice centralized brain. It's solid.
Ricard Soleil talks about liquid brains such as ants and termites and so on. But surely that's just a
metaphor. You know, we've got a real brain. This is kind of a metaphorical collective intelligence.
Well, Descartes, for example, really liked the pineal gland because it was a unitary organ in
the brain, which he thought was well fitting to the unified experience of a human. But if he had
access to good microscopy, he would have looked inside that pineal gland. And when he found that
there's not really one of anything, there are a ton of cells in there. And inside each one of those
things is all this stuff. So we are all collective intelligences. There is no, to my knowledge,
there is no monolithic sort of non decomposable intelligence. And what we're made of actually is
things that are like this. Now, this happens to be a free living unicellular organism, but this is
what a cell is capable of. This is called the lacrimaria. You can see it's hunting for food in its
environment. There's no nervous system here. There's no brain. There are no other cells.
There are no stem cells. Just one cell handling its business in a small kind of area. It has very
high competencies at single cell level agendas. In fact, within that cell, there are pathways,
molecular pathways, or things like gene regulatory networks. And if you don't assume that these networks
are sort of dumb machine-like things, but actually test them, you will find out that by stimulating
the different nodes and looking at other nodes using the standard tools of behavior science,
you can find six different kinds of learning, including Pavlovian conditioning. Again, no neurons,
no brains, no nucleus needed, none of that stuff. Just a few nodes interacting with each other in ways
describable by ordinary differential equations. That is sufficient for a number of interesting
examples of learning. And so all that is described here, but we are now building machines to actually
interact with cells in that way and to train them, which has all sorts of applications for drug
conditioning and things like that. But so inside of individual cells, you already have this material
that out of the box, due to the properties of the mathematics, are able to do things like learn from
experience. So in our architecture, what the biological material has is this kind of multi-scale kind of
scheme where not only are we structurally a set of nested dolls, but actually functionally each of these
layers from the molecular networks to the subcellular components to networks of cells, tissues, organs,
of course whole organisms, but also swarms. At each of this level, the material solves various kinds of
problems in its own space. So there's competency throughout. So we're talking about, I'll describe
in more detail momentarily what these other spaces are, but basically there are agendas, memory, forming
ability, learning capacity, and so on at every level. And they're all interacting, cooperating, and competing
at the same time. So this remarkable architecture allows some really wild behavior that we still have not been able to
replicate in any of our engineering. I'll show you some examples. One example is this. So this is a tadpole,
so here are the nostrils, here's the mouth, here's the brain, the gut, and the tail. Now what you'll notice
is that what we've done here, we've prevented the primary eyes from forming, this is where they would
normally be, but we did induce an eye on its tail, okay? And so what's happening here is that we put this
eye on the tail, and then we use this machine which we have built to test these animals for visual learning,
specifically to be able to learn to stay away from a moving light spot that chases them around.
What we find is that they can see quite well. These eyes put out an optic nerve, the optic nerve comes
out. It does not go all the way to the brain. It goes, in some cases, synapses onto the spinal cord,
in some cases the gut, in some cases nowhere at all that we can find. And these animals can see pretty
well. Now isn't this remarkable? This requires no evolutionary adaptation. We've completely changed the
sensory motor architecture of this creature. We didn't need new rounds of selection, other kinds
of compensatory mutations, and so on. Why does this work out of the box? Why is this animal able to use
this novel architecture without all of the readjustments? As I'll argue later in the talk, it's
because I think from the very beginning, these animals with these cells, in fact, do not take
much for granted. They're solving their self-assembly problem on the fly. The tadpole never assumed that
the eyes were going to necessarily be in the right location, and it's able to make this work from
scratch because that's what every embryo does. And I'll show you some more examples of that.
Here's another example. These are planaria, these flatworms that have this amazing power of regeneration,
so you can cut them into pieces. Every piece gives rise to a perfect little worm. But one thing you can
do is you can train them. They're also smart. You can train them on place conditioning tasks
where there's a little bumpy surface that we laser etch into the petri dish and we feed them,
and so they recognize this as a safe place to eat. We then cut off their heads, which contains a true
centralized brain. The tail sits there with no behavior for about eight days, slowly grows back a new
brain. And when it does grow back a new brain, you find out that these animals remember
where they remember the original information. So that tells you that, first of all, the information
is not entirely confined to the brain, but also that it can be imprinted onto a brand new brain
when that appears. So the movement of information across tissue and from this tissue into the centralized
brain is something that's a kind of a remarkable feature, the ability to move and accommodate
this radical reconstruction event. You can imagine the implications of this for human
regenerative therapeutics of degenerative brain disease, right? So if we get new tissues moved
into our brain, what happens to our personalities, to our memories? It might well be okay because,
at least in some systems, these memories can move. They can take over new tissues.
Another example is this. So this is not Photoshop or AI. This is a real fly. What these flies have on
their surface is a picture of some local ants. And what it does is it kind of wiggles the wings real
fast and it looks like the ants are scurrying around and it keeps predators away because they
don't want to deal with the biting ants. And so in effect, it's running this kind of stripped down,
very coarse-grained 2D morphogenetic program that looks like ants on its wings. And it's kind of
remarkable, but not more remarkable than the ability of the fly to build itself together. So this, in fact,
is just a kind of virtualized morphogenesis that it's doing here. But the whole fly had to do this
itself to become a three-dimensional fly. And so what we have here is this idea that life actually is
navigating all kinds of spaces, many of which are very hard for us to recognize. So when we talk
about things being embodied or not, for example, AIs and software and other kinds of things, whether
they do or do not have an embodiment, I think we have to be really careful and humble about the fact
that we are not good at recognizing spaces, unconventional spaces in which embodiment can take
place. We are pretty good as humans to observe intelligence as movement, medium-speed movement
of medium-sized objects in three-dimensional space. You know, we see animals doing clever things. We can
sort of recognize that. But biology uses lots of different spaces. So the space of possible gene
expressions, the space of possible physiological states, and anatomical morphous space, which is the
space of geometric configurations that the body can take. And in all of these spaces,
there is some navigation that if we were good at observing it, we would immediately recognize this
as some kind of intelligent problem-solving behavior. For example, all of our organs point
outwards. If we had a kind of, think about it like a sense of taste, but pointing inwards into our body
chemistry and, you know, sensitive to, I don't know, 20 different parameters of your body physiology,
I think we would have no problem realizing that our liver and our kidneys are intelligent
symbionts that live in this space and keep us alive during all of the different things that happen to
it in those spaces. So for the next few minutes, what I want to focus on is this space right here.
I want to show you what problem-solving in these spaces looks like. And I could talk about some
other, some amazing examples, but for reasons of time, I'm just going to stick with this one space.
And so what we're going to do is take a look at what happens when we entertain the possibility that
morphogenesis, so the self-assembly and the self-repair of living bodies, are the behavior of a
collective intelligence of cells. So we're kind of pivoting some ideas from neuroscience and saying
that the movement within this anatomical space is a kind of behavior, and there's a collective
intelligence of cells that is executing this behavior. And so let's look at what that looks like.
Well, the first thing is that development is very reliable. So you start off with a single cell and
eventually you get an amazing human target morphology. But this is not why I'm calling it intelligence.
It is not because it's reliable. It is not because there's a huge jump in complexity here. That's not
it. The reason I'm calling it intelligence is because this process has some remarkable problem-solving
capacities in navigating that space. The first one you notice right away when you cut that early
embryo in half. You don't get two half bodies, which you get are perfectly normal monozygotic twins.
And that's because from different positions in this morphous space,
the system will move to a region that corresponds to an ensemble of patterns that are species-specific
to this organism. And they can avoid various local maxima and things like that. So you can get there
from different positions. That's already interesting. William James defined intelligence as this ability,
some degree of the ability, to reach the same goal by different means. Okay, so that's what we're looking at.
Some animals can do this throughout their lifespan. So this guy is an axolotl. This amphibian regenerates
its limbs, its eyes, its jaws, spinal cord, heart, parts of the brain, and so on. And so anywhere that is
amputated along this limb, the cells will grow very quickly. They will form the pattern and then they stop.
When do they stop? They stop when the correct pattern has been completed. So they take this
journey. They've been deviated from this region, from the correct region of anatomical space. They
work really hard to get back there. When they get back there, they cease. So it's a kind of, you can
think about this as a kind of anatomical homeostasis, an error minimization scheme that is achieved in
this space. And here's another example that we discovered some years back, that when you have a
tadpole that has to rearrange its face to become a frog, so the jaws have to move, the eyes have to
come forward and so on. You could think of it, and in fact, people did think of this as a hardwired
process, that everything just moves in the right direction and that's that. But what we tested this
experimentally, we made so-called Picasso frogs and we scrambled all the positions of the craniofacial
organs. Here's the eye on the back of the head, the mouth is off to the side. These animals become
quite normal frogs and that's because all of these different things don't just move the same normal
path. They move into novel paths, sometimes going too far and coming back, until they get to this
correct pattern and then they stop. So the genetics, in fact, does not specify a bunch of hardwired
rearrangements, it specifies a system that executes a flexible program that can recognize unexpected
states and take corrective action. This is context-sensitive problem-solving, which raises an
interesting question. How does it know what's correct? How does it know where it's going in this
space? And I'll show you that momentarily. So let's talk about how all this works.
And we've been studying this idea of morphogenesis as problem-solving behavior in that space.
And by learning to communicate with these problem-solving modules, we've actually discovered
some new approaches in biomedicine. And we did that by discovering that bioelectricity is a kind
of cognitive glue that binds individual cells towards a common purpose. So let's talk about that.
The first thing we can think about is actually, how do individual embryos come to be anyway?
So here's a blastoderm, an embryonic blastoderm. There might be 50,000 cells at this stage. And we
look at that and we say, well, look, there's one embryo. So what are we counting? What is there one of?
What are we counting when we say there's one embryo? Mike, can you hear us? I can, yeah.
There is a remote question. Please, go for it.
Of course. Well, there is a question in the room. So to the Picasso example that you were writing,
wouldn't the information about the rearrangement into the correct kind of frog pattern also be
genetically coded? It's just you didn't mess with that program, but you mess with the locations?
Yeah. The question of what is actually genetically coded is really deep. When you read the genome
itself, of course, you don't see any of these things. The genome codes for proteins. It doesn't
code for eyes or shape or the number or the location of anything. The direct information that you get
from the genome is protein. And so if you don't mind, maybe in the Q&A, because we could talk about
this for a really long time. It's basically, you know, bottom line, I think, is that what the
genetics specifies is a really interesting kind of hardware. But the product of that hardware in
solving these problems, I don't think it's really fruitful to pin that on the genetics per se.
But obviously, the hardware is important, as it always is. But I'm happy to talk more about that after.
So here's actually, this is a perfectly good example of the role of the genetics. So look,
here's a blastoderm. It has, I don't know, tens of thousands of cells. When we say it's one embryo,
what we're actually counting is alignment, physical alignment. I mean, the cells literally align,
but more importantly, they're aligned in their journey to in-morphous space. They are all working
on one thing. Now, what you can do, and I worked on this as a grad student within duck embryos,
you can take a little needle, and you can make some scratches in this blastoderm. What will happen
is that for the four to six hours that it takes for them to heal back up, each of these little
regions will not recognize that the others are there. It thinks it's the only one, and it self-organizes
completely into an embryo. And when they do heal up, you get conjoined twins, triplets, and so on.
So how many individuals are actually in this blastoderm? Well, it could be zero, it could be one,
two, three, up to probably half a dozen. You don't know how many, and the genetics doesn't tell you
how many because this process doesn't do anything to the genetics. What the genetics has given you
is an excitable medium, which is able to self-organize into some number of embryos that
are going to perform specific journeys in morphous space, but how many there are is flexible, and it's
up to the current circumstances. Now, what we, you know, you could ask this kind of question is like,
how many of these could you possibly get per cubic millimeter of living tissue? All of these systems
have to, by putting themselves together, they have to actively determine where is the border between me
and the environment, because every cell has some other cell as a neighbor. So this embryo has to decide,
where are my borders? Where do I end and somebody else begins? And this has, much like everything else
that we study in morphogenesis, and this has very interesting parallels in neuroscience and psychiatry,
because fundamentally the issue of individuation and dissociation, like in the dissociative identity
disorders, split brain patients, and so on, this question of how many of us are in here and where
do I end and somebody else begins is a really fundamental aspect of self-assembly. Now, another
interesting thing that the living material does is it really optimizes for saliency, not fidelity of
information, and here's an example to see that. You've got caterpillars, which live in a kind of
two-dimensional world, and they crawl around and eat leaves, and they have a brain that's suitable for
doing that. They have to metamorphose and become this, which is actually a hard-bodied creature, which has
a completely different controller than the soft body here. They fly around. They live in a 3D world.
What's remarkable is that if you train the caterpillar for particular stimulus and the reward,
the caterpillars will remember. So if you train, the butterflies will remember. So if the caterpillar
is trained to find leaves at a particular color disk, the butterflies can do this. But what's important is
that during this process, that brain is completely basically refactored. So most of the cells die.
Many of the connections are broken. It rebuilds a completely new brain. And one interesting question
is how does the information survive this? That's interesting. But an even more, I think, important
fundamental question is the idea that, well, the actual memories of this caterpillar are of no use to
the butterfly. It doesn't move the same way. It doesn't even eat the same stuff. Leaves are of no interest to
the butterfly at once, nectar. So you can't just store with fidelity the original information. You
have to remap it onto a new architecture when you put it together. So this ability of the living
material to reinterpret the memory engrams that it has at any given moment and to use it in whatever
way is appropriate now, as opposed to trying to keep the interpretation stable, I think is a really
important aspect of biological intelligence. And one way that it works is that this kind of
architecture, this bow tie thing, where you have a lot of inputs and then you have a very constrained
set of either a single or a constrained set of nodes here, is ubiquitous. This happens in chemical
networks, in biomechanical networks, in bioelectrics. There are many bow ties like this,
because what actually has to happen here is that, and this will be completely familiar to some of the
machine learning folks, is that by squeezing it through a bottleneck, you are forcing a generalization
and you are forcing the being on the other side to have to be creative in interpreting that information
because you've thrown away a lot. You don't have the details. You just have some kind of generative
prompt that you then have to reinflate. And what that means for biology is that a living being at
any one moment does not have access to the past. What you have access to are the engrams, the memory
traces that has been left in your brain and body by past experience, but now it's on you. And this
happens every few hundred milliseconds. It's on you to, at least in the neural case,
it's on you to now reinterpret. What do those memory traces actually mean? What do those engrams mean?
Because long term, as far as biology is concerned, everything is going to change. Not only the
environment, but your own parts are going to change evolutionarily. You will be mutated.
You don't know what your body is actually going to look like. And so what you have to commit to,
because the material, unlike in most of our computerized constructions, the material is
completely unreliable. You never know how many copies of a given protein you're really going to
have, what's going to be degraded, what's going to be moving around and so on. It's very noisy,
very plastic. And I think what biology does is from the beginning, lean into the fact that everything
is up for reinterpretation. You don't take the past too seriously. The information you have are
messages from your past self, but those messages, so all your memories are messages from a past self,
but all those messages are up for reinterpretation. And all of that is described here,
but it has some important consequences. It means, and this is back to what I was saying about that
tadpole with the eye on its back, it means that every act, both of behavior in anatomical space,
but also in kind of, you know, neural, conventional neural behavior, what you're doing is at any given
moment, you are playing the hands you're dealt. You are creatively interpreting the material and the
the data that you have because you, you don't, you don't have access to, to what it really was.
And, and because you're throwing away so much detail, this part can probably be algorithmic.
So some sort of compression and generalization. So, so, so learning, but this part has to be creative.
Okay. Because I don't believe there can be a, a, a purely kind of deductive process here. You have to,
you have to creatively, uh, uh, uh, utilize that information and evolution does this all the time,
right? So, so creatures generally don't make other creatures. They make eggs and then these eggs have
to be reinflated. That genetic information has to be reinterpreted and it can be reinterpreted in
really clever ways. I will show you an example. This is the cross section through a, uh, to a kidney
tubule in a newt. So normally eight to 10 cells work together to, um, give a, uh, uh, give rise to this
kind of, uh, specific architecture. Now, one thing you can do to these is, uh, you can, you can greatly
increase the amount of genetic material, meaning that, uh, you can, you can sort of squeeze them
to, to prevent the cell from dividing, but the nucleus, uh, replicates. And so you can have not
just two N, but four N, six N, and so on. So, uh, the first, uh, the first thing that you find is that
while the nucleus gets bigger and bigger, the cells do too. So the cells grow to accommodate the nucleus,
but the newt stays the same size. And if you take a cross section through those tubules, you find
that it has much larger cells, but fewer of those cells are building the exact same structure. So, so,
so it, it has adapted to the size of the genetic material. It has adapted to the, um, adapted the
size of the cells, and now fewer of those cells to get to the same anatomical outcome. Things get
really crazy when you make, um, 6N newts where the cells get so gigantic, one single cell will wrap
around itself and give rise to the same structure. So, so, so think about what this means in the
service of the, uh, the, the same anatomical outcome, it will call up different molecular
mechanisms to do so. Uh, in this case, cell to cell communication, in this case, cytoskeletal
bending, you're reusing, you're using the tools you have in different ways to get what you want.
This is basically precisely what, um, uh, the kind of thing that, uh, that James was talking about.
And think of, think of something else. Um, imagine, imagine you're a newt coming into this world.
You don't know how much of your genetic material you're going to have. You don't know how many
cells you're going to have, because we can also add and take away cells. It doesn't matter. You,
you don't know, uh, uh, a lot about your own parts, nevermind the environment changing,
your own parts can change and you still have to figure out how to make a coherent, uh, structure.
And you, and what, what, what the biology does, and this is still very poorly understood in all
of these different cases, but what it, what it has is incredible flexibility, because I think
that every instance of, uh, the self-assembly of both bodies and minds is this kind of de novo
problem solving where you have some tools and you find, uh, ways to, to do this. And one of the ways
it does this is through, uh, a very, uh, very extensive homeodynamic kinds of, uh, um, uh, circuits
where there is a stored set point and everything works really hard to try to, uh, get back to that
set point. Now, individual cells have cells have tiny little set points. So things like pH and
hunger level and things like that, they're single numbers, but this kind of thing has to store a much
bigger, uh, pattern as far as what is the correct set point, right? How do we know what a correct
limb or a correct face is? And so we have started making models of what happens when cells come
together into networks that allow them to do the kind of pattern completion that you need to do when
you're missing a region of the body or to, um, you know, uh, uh, uh, reach, reach specific regions
of morphospace. And we talk about, um, something that, that I call the cognitive light cone, which is
simply the size of the goal states you're able to pursue. So what is the maximal size, both in space
and time of the set points that you are capable of pursuing and in, in different spaces. And this is
what it looks like biologically. So, so, so, so unicellular organisms have little tiny goals. They
have everything they care about is, is, is right here. It's a, just a few minutes back in time, just a
few minutes of predictive capacity, uh, very small spatially as well, little, little tiny cognitive light
cones, all concerned with metabolic states, uh, um, uh, proliferative states, uh, physiological states,
things like that. But during evolution and development, something amazing happens. They
scale up into networks, which pursue enormous grandiose goals like, like, like this. In other
words, the set point that serves as a termination to this process is a very complicated structure.
It has the right number of fingers. No individual cell knows what a finger is or how many fingers you're
supposed to have, but the collective does. And the way we know that is because if you try to
deviate it, it will get back to exactly this. Now this, this, uh, this, uh, this capacity has a
failure mode. That failure mode is cancer. So when you disconnect cells from the collective, uh, they,
they no longer, uh, remember that they were all a part of one big, uh, intelligence working on in this
space, they go back to this. And so this is human glioblastoma and, um, these cells have rolled back to
their evolutionary tiny little, little, uh, ancient, uh, ancient goals. So what is the cognitive glue
then that binds them together towards these grandiose construction projects? Uh, well, what,
what is it that goes wrong here now in the nervous system? Uh, we know what it is. Uh, it's, it's the
bioelectricity across your neurons, which allows you to, uh, do things like this. This rat has been trained.
It presses the lever. It gets a delicious reward. Uh, no individual cell has both experiences. So the cells
up at the feet that touch the lever, the cells in the gut, get the sugar, no individual cell
has both experiences. So who owns the associative memory? Well, it's the rat. The rat knows things
that the parts don't know. Uh, and what holds the rat together as opposed to a pile of cells
is the electrical network. So, uh, in neuroscience, this is what it looks like. The hardware is basically
uh, a set of cells that have these ion channels in their membrane. That means they can acquire specific
electrical states and they do or do not pass those states onto their neighbors through these
electrical synapses known as gap junctions. And that's that, that, that hardware underlies
this physiology. So here's a, um, this group did this amazing, uh, video of a zebrafish,
a live zebrafish brain. And the commitment of neuroscience is that we should be able to decode this.
So this is neural decoding by, by watching these, uh, there's these electrophysiological events.
We should be able to, uh, to say what are the thoughts of the, you know, the preferences,
the memories, the, and so on of this creature as it navigates three-dimensional space. And people
are working on this quite, quite hard, but it turns out that evolution caught on to this, uh,
this method of, uh, creating higher order beings with intelligence and other spaces very early on.
Every cell in your body has these ion channels. Most cells are connected by these gap junctions.
And, uh, around the time of bacterial biofilms, evolution first noticed that you could use
electricity to, uh, uh, assemble large scale, uh, individuals across space and time and coordinate
information. And so what we've been doing for, for some years now is, uh, uh, using, using the
approaches from, uh, from, from neuroscience and, and behavioral science to, uh, ask the same question.
If we, if, if could, could we decode what the non-neural cells are thinking in their journeys
through anatomical space? Well, what, what are these, what are these electrophysiological patterns
mean? And, um, on a single cell level, what we can do now is, uh, this is again, a tadpole. It has a
little tumor, uh, because of an induced human oncogene. And the thing is that once that happens,
it turns out that oncogenes are really good at disconnecting cells electrically from their neighbors.
As soon as they do that, you can already see, so this is a voltage sensitive fluorescent dye.
You can already see, uh, that the voltage here is quite different. They're depolarizing,
they're disconnecting. And as far as they're concerned, the rest of the embryo is just
external environment to them. They're not more selfish than normal cells. They just have little
tiny cells. Their cells get smaller, that border between self and world shrinks. And now, uh, the rest
of the body is just environment. So what do they do? They proliferate and they migrate. And that's
metastasis. So, so this, this, uh, unusual way of thinking about the cancer problem suggests the
novel therapeutic. It means that instead of trying to kill the cells, or in fact, fix the genetic
damage. So these cells have, uh, an oncoprotein, which, uh, you know, a nasty KRAS or a, uh, um, a p53
mutation or something like that. Well, instead of fixing it, what if we electrophysiologically
reconnect them to the rest of the cells? Leave, leave the, so, so here's the, these two are the same
animal. So the red is the, is the tag. It's a fluorescent tag on the oncogene. So, so if you
sequence the genetics, you'll say, oh yeah, there's definitely going to be a tumor here because we can
see the, the hardware defect. It's an oncogene, but actually there is no tumor because what we've
done is injected an ion channel that forces these cells into electrical communication with the rest.
And they simply go on their way doing what the network was trying to do, which is to build nice
muscle and skin and all of that. So, so this is here, here, once again, we're seeing that
dissociation between what actually happens and, uh, what the, what the genetics are, because
some genetic, some, some hardware defects are fixable in software, not all of them, but, but
some of them. And so what we've done is develop some tools. So you can see here, this is an early
frog embryo. You can see all the electrical conversations that these cells are having with
each other. These are some explanted cells. Again, you can see the colors represent the voltage of all
the cells. We do a lot of computational modeling to try to understand how the transition between these
states takes place and how the different ion channels and the properties of the excitable
medium of the tissue underlie the self-assembly of patterns. So you can think like Turing patterns
and other kinds of patterns, um, and, and why those patterns have, have memory properties,
why they, uh, they, they produce certain kinds of structures and then, and so on. So I want to show
you, um, just very briefly what they look like in vivo. So this is what we call the electric face.
This is a pre-pattern. It's a bioelectrical pre-pattern. Here's the video. Here's one frame
from it. This is, this is what you're looking at here is the, is the electrical pattern memory that
tells this tissue where, uh, the various organs are going to be built. Meaning all the different
genes that need to be turned on and off are dictated by this bioelectrical pattern. If you
change the pattern, uh, then, then the, the, the, all the downstream steps, uh, will, will change.
Not only is this, uh, is this how, uh, individual, uh, uh, uh, organ primordia and different,
different, uh, structures are formed, but you can see across, uh, even, even explanted and culture,
there's some very rich, uh, uh, bioelectrical dynamics happening. And in fact, individual embryos
use this to talk to each other. So there's a, there's a notion that we discovered recently of a hyper
embryo where actually it's not just within one being, but, but, but these embryos, when you, when you poke this,
this one here, uh, all the others know about it and there's all sorts of novel gene expression in
the hyper embryo, uh, that works, uh, that is different from what the, uh, what the individual,
uh, embryos do. And you can see this, you can see this kind of information propagating across the
collective. So again, that multi-scale, right? Bioelectricity has the cognitive loop between
cells and actually, um, even between, uh, organs and between, um, embryos. Now, now watching these
patterns is all well and good, but more importantly, we need functional
ways to read and write that information. Uh, we don't use, um, any applied fields, waves,
no frequencies, no magnets, nothing like that. What we do is develop tools to, uh, operate the
bioelectric interface that cells use to, uh, communicate and control each other. So that
means target the ion channels in their surface to control the voltage and target the gap junctions
to control the topology of the network. So, uh, in, in, in the neurosciences would be
synaptic plasticity or intrinsic plasticity. We use all the same, all the same tools, optogenetics,
uh, pharmacology, and, and so on. And so this is the communication interface that we're trying to
hack. So what we want to do is we want to manipulate the information content of these
electrical patterns on the hypothesis that it is the medium in which, uh, the collective
intelligence of cells is storing its data while it's navigating that morphospace, right? While, while it's
trying to get to where, wherever it's trying to get to. So let me show you just a couple of examples
of what that actually looks like. So here is, uh, an early frog embryo. Um, I showed you in that
electric face, there's a particular little, uh, little, uh, spot that tells you where the eye is
going to be. So we can inject a potassium channel in a different spot of the body to form that same
thing. Let's do that in the gut here. So, so the cells, uh, sure enough, they will make an eye.
These eyes have all the lens, retina, optic nerve. They have all the right, um, components. So that
tells you that these bioelectric patterns are instructive. They, uh, they, they will, uh, control
the, the outcome. In fact, uh, it is very modular. So we are not trying to tell individual stem cells
what to be, or, or what genes to turn on. We, we gave a very high level subroutine call, which
said build an eye here and everything else happens from there. The material is, is, is, uh, organized
in a way that once, uh, once a large scale pattern, um, uh, tell, uh, tells the, the, the system
what to do, all the other steps are, are, are, are undertaken the same way that in neuroscience,
when you're training the rat, you give it stimuli, all of the other things that have to happen, like,
uh, tuning the, the, the synapses and, and, and everything else in the brain, you're, you don't
have to be in charge of that, right? That, that amazing bioelectric interface takes care of all of
that all you're providing is the top level experience. Uh, the system is rearranging
itself as needed to, uh, to meet certain goals. Um, in fact, this, the, the, the material has,
has another, uh, uh, incredible property, which is scaling to the task it's given. So this is a lens
sitting out in the flank of a, of a tadpole somewhere. Um, we've only injected a few of the
cells here. Uh, the blue ones are the ones we injected. There's not enough of them to form an eye.
So what do they do? They recruit all of these, which we never touched. Uh, it's, so it's a secondary, um,
recruitment event. They recruit all of these to help them build this eye. And in fact,
they have a whole conversation that turns out where these cells are saying, don't do this.
We're meant to be skin or, or gut. And these cells are saying, no, we should, we should be an eye.
And depending on who wins, you either get an eye or you don't, but it's, uh, you know, it's a kind
of recruitment, like you see in other collective intelligences where, for example, ants will recruit
nest mates when they come along, uh, come across a big piece of food. So, so this is the kind of thing you
can do. You can, you can grow, um, and you can induce entire organs. You can also, um, radically
re-specify the shape of the body. So these are those flat worms that I showed you, the planaria
that, uh, that need to, the pieces need to remember how many heads should planaria have anyway. And
normally they do this by maintaining this voltage gradient that says one head. Uh, we can now
manipulate that by rewriting it to say, no, actually you should have two heads. Now this is, this is, uh,
uh, you know, quite, uh, quite messy still, but the technology is still being worked out.
But what we can do is say, no, actually you should have two heads. And if we cut this animal,
sure enough, what it will build is a two headed animal. Now notice something interesting. This
electrical pattern is not a map of this two headed animal. This electrical pattern is a map of this
perfectly normal structurally and in fact, molecularly. So the molecular biology says one head,
the anatomy says one head, but the stored electrical pattern of what I'm going to build,
if I should get injured at a future time. So this is a very primitive form of counterfactual memory,
uh, says two heads. And in fact, that's, that's what happens, but it doesn't do anything. It's a
latent memory until you activate it by injury. And the reason I keep saying it's a memory. Oh,
and by the way, this is, this is another, uh, um, uh, aspect of the genetics. Uh, there's nothing
genetically wrong with these, with these animals. The same exact hardware can, can, uh, store at least
two different representations of what a normal body plan should be and where in Morpha space we're going to go.
Here or here. And the reason I keep calling it a memory is because once you do this, these two headed,
uh, these two headed animals are permanently two headed. You can cut this middle fragment,
no more treatment of any kind in plain water forever. As far as we can tell, um, it will continue to grow
two heads because the electric circuit, uh, that's, uh, that's, that's, that's formed in this tissue
has this amazing property that once you reset the pattern, it keeps. Okay. And not all of them do
this, but this one in particular does. And, uh, here they are, you can see this, this video of
these two headed animals, um, hanging around. And again, the genetics are untouched. There's nothing
wrong with the genetics here. So the question of how many heads should a planarian have is tricky.
On the one hand, what the genetics does do is encode a, uh, some, some biological hardware that all things
being equal in default mode will give rise to a pattern that says one head, but it doesn't have
to be that way. It's, it's reprogrammable by experience, by transient experience with that
does not change the, the, the genetics at all. And in that case, you will have a permanent line of
two headed animals. And you can imagine, we don't do this of course, but you could imagine, uh, throwing
these, these animals in the, in the, in the river somewhere, uh, they do, um, reproduce by, by
splitting themselves in half and regenerating. And so a hundred years later, some
scientists will come along. They'll scoop up some samples. They'll say, oh, uh, cool. A speciation
event. Here's some one headed forms. There's some two headed forms. Great. A speciation event. Let's
see, you know, and figure out what, where, where it happened. And that is, that is not where it is.
Sorry. Somebody changed. Yeah. Hi, Michael. Good to see you again.
Two questions about this specifically. One, given that there is this maintenance that at, that begs
an obvious question of why does not natural selection work on this. You don't need to be genetic. You don't
need to be epigenetic. You can be like this. That's one question. Another one is you've shown, well, I just
changed the electrical field here. I depolarize or I polarize. And in this way, I'm producing an eye. When
I do that, I'm producing a leg and so on and so forth. But there must be something different saying produce a
leg versus saying produce an eye. So the obvious question is how many degrees of freedom, how many
memories can you actually store? Or does that all depend upon the biochemistry and so on and so forth?
Yeah. Yeah. Great, great questions. Um, first of all, um, I, I will say that, uh, I think evolution
uses this all the time because, uh, it, with, uh, in every system that we've looked at things like,
I mean, here, this is, uh, the, the fact that this thing builds a face at all is evolution exploiting
the, uh, the, the self-organization of exactly this pattern. And we have computational models that
produce this, this, the smiley pattern in the tissue. This is exactly the outcome of evolution,
um, uh, uh, exploiting the self-organization, the memory and the self-healing, the pattern completion,
uh, properties of electric circuits. So I think, I think evolution's all over this.
It was from the time of bacterial biofilms. There's some amazing work by, um,
Garol Soel at UCSD on how, how bacteria use this. I think it's ancient and I think evolution uses this
all the time. Well, but, but a question, I mean, you've got, we've got inheritance, but where's the
mutation? That's the other, one of the other key ingredients of natural selection. So it's actually
trying out the space and then you have differential survival and so on and so forth. I, I, you know,
this is, this is again, uh, uh, a discussion that could take, uh, by itself a really long time. I,
I don't believe that the standard story of, uh, mutation and differential survival is sufficient
for understanding, uh, all of this, not, not just the bioelectrics, but in general, I think there's a
lot more going on here. And I think that, um, I'll, I'll get to some of this at the very end, but,
you know, but partly, I mean, if, if you wanted to look at the, at the conventional piece of this,
there are certainly mutations in ion channels. So for example, when evolution discovered voltage
gated ion channels by manipulating the, the properties of the protein, the voltage gated,
the, the ion channel protein, what you get is a voltage gated current conductance,
which is a transistor. Once you have that, you can, you can build all kinds of things.
So in, in a certain sense, yeah, evolution certainly shapes the hardware and by changing,
uh, different kinds of, um, by providing different kinds of ion channels, you get excitable
media with different properties for sure, for sure. But I also think that there's, um,
it's not, it's not all about this because there are, uh, many, many important properties of this
that are, and this is, this is the thing I'm going to talk about at the end, if I, if I get to it,
that are, uh, they're kind of free lunches from the physics of it. And, and, and, uh, there are aspects
of the laws of mathematics, of computation, of, of physics and so on that you get kind of for free.
And I think evolution exploits this greatly. And I think what these, what these proteins are,
what evolution actually produces are a kind of pointer into that space, into that latent space.
And, and let me, let me show you, um, let me show you some of, some of those examples and then we'll,
you know, we'll, we'll talk more about this. And Mike, not, uh, usually I would be holding up a sign,
but you have about 10 minutes left. 10 minutes. Okay. Uh, I will skip a bunch of stuff then. And,
uh, and, and fly through a couple of things. Um, okay. Uh, we won't bother with this. Uh,
just to say that it's not just about head number. In fact, you can make different head shapes.
Again, it's stock hardware. We're not changing the genetics, but if you manipulate the bioelectric
pattern, it can make the shapes of other species of planaria, about a hundred to 150 million years
evolutionary distance. So there's this amorphous space. This, this species is perfectly happy to
visit these other locations, but that's not what it normally does. Uh, it makes brains and stem cell
distributions like these other species. In fact, you can go further in this latent space.
And you can make things that, um, don't look like a planaria at all. Uh, so you can make these crazy
spiky things and these 3d, uh, kind of cylinders and so on. So, uh, uh, this is meant to say journey,
journey, not journal, auto correct here. Uh, but, but the idea is that, um, uh, we, we need,
we need to explore this space. And I want to, I want to show you a little bit of that if I have time.
So, uh, so, so let's talk about, um, what, what can happen here. So, so this is normal development.
So here are your acorns, uh, that give rise to this nice flat oak leaf. And we see so many of
these and we think, well, that is what the genome encodes. This genome encodes this exact structure,
right? We're with this. This is the temptation because this is so reliable. Well, along comes
a bioengineer, not a human bioengineer. This is a wasp. What the wasp has evolved to do is to prompt
these cells by signals, by chemical signals that get the plant cells to build this or this or lots of
other things. These are plant galls. They are not made of wasp cells. They are made of plant cells.
You, you would have no idea that these cells are capable of building something like this
if you didn't see this example, right? Because, because of this, uh, lulls us into a false sense of,
um, limitation on what the, what the, what the genome is actually capable of. It's actually capable
of a lot more. Now I'll show you this. Uh, if I ask you what, what you think this thing is,
um, it looks like something I got off the bottom of a pond somewhere. And then I could tell you that I
sequenced the genome. The genome is a hundred percent homo sapiens. What these are, are we call
them anthrobots. They are, um, a novel construct made of adult. There's no, no embryonic tissue
anywhere. Here is adult human tracheal epithelial cells from elderly patients, which under certain
circumstances, uh, uh, reboot their multicellularity and form this kind of thing that runs around. And
this matches no, uh, normal, um, the developmental stage of human development. Uh, it has some
interesting properties. If you, if you, um, if you make, if you make some neurons here and you
put a big scratch through it and you let the, let these bots in, they'll make something called a
super bot cluster. And four days later, what you see is that what they did underneath is that they
took the two sides of the neural wound and they knitted them together. Who would have thought your,
your tracheal cells that sit there quietly for in your, in your airway for long periods of time
could self-assemble into the small tile little creature that's able to do this. It, it, it has
a radically transformed transcriptome, 9,000 genes that are different from what the human body is
is typically doing. So, so, so all these things are novel, but there's never been any anthrobots.
There's never been evolutionary selection to be a good anthrobot or to have a specific
anthrobot transcriptome. Again, stock hardware, there's nothing wrong with this genome. No, no synthetic
circuits, no nanomaterials, no scaffolds, uh, nothing. Um, I, I'm, I'm sure, I'm sure. Sorry.
What are those neurons? Is that in vitro or is that in the body?
Sorry. This is right now, this is in vitro. We're obviously testing in vivo next,
but this is all, this is a petri dish. This is a two, two, two dimensional petri dish.
Um, I, I, I'm pretty sure I showed you this last time. These are, these are xenobots,
same kind of thing, frog skin cells that, uh, cannot reproduce by the normal froggy fashion,
but they run around when given, um, loose skin cells. And they, they basically, this is like
von Neumann's dream of a machine that runs around and makes a copy of itself from things in the
environment because these little balls mature into the next generation of xenobots, which makes the
next generation, which makes the next. So, so what I'm really interested in is where does this stuff
come from? Because you can't pin it on selection. There's never been selection to do any of this stuff.
Um, and, um, you know, it's not designed by us. We didn't teach them to do all this. So,
so what I think is happening here is that all of these kinds of things that we build,
these chimeras and these synthetic beings are, they're a kind of vehicle for exploring this
latent space of a possibilities that evolution, uh, uh, you know, uh, makes use of. But I think that,
uh, because there's such a heavy component from this space that, um, we can't really say that it's
because that these things are happening because of a specific algorithm or because of the genetics.
It's, uh, there's a, there's a really important, uh, external component here that I do think has
a structure to it, which means we can explore it. This is not a mysterious view. I think that,
um, we just, we don't want to be surprised when these emergent capabilities show up.
We want to have a systematic process of, of, of, uh, exploring it. And I think that's what,
that's what these constructs that we make are. And, uh, and I'll just, I'll just end, uh, here by a
couple of quick things, uh, by saying that because life is so, uh, uh, plastic and, and solving problems
from scratch every, at every opportunity, pretty much any combination of evolved material design,
engineered material and software is some kind of potential agents. So hybrots and cyborgs and the
many of these things already exist, but there's going to be way more. And everything that Darwin
meant when he said endless forms, most beautiful in life is like a tiny little corner of this
incredible option space. Many of which we are going to be living in and with in the coming decades.
So I really think that the field of diverse intelligence is critical in trying to understand
novel problem spaces, novel kinds of minds, the emergence of these things that are not
directly from the algorithms or the chemistry that we are putting together to allow us to have
a kind of ethical synthbiosis. And by the way, this, this word was, um, invented for me by GPT,
uh, as a kind of, uh, as a way to, to, to, uh, uh, explain the idea that we should be, you know,
we should be figuring out how to live with these other unconventional, um, beings. And, and we've,
we've begun to study, um, the emergent, uh, goals and competencies of very minimal systems.
If anybody's interested in this, here's a study of a good old sorting algorithms, right? So if you,
if you're a computer scientist, you've, you've studied this, everybody has these sorting algorithms.
They do all kinds of interesting things that we never knew about that are kind of,
there are kinds of problem solving in a very minimal, transparent, deterministic, uh, kind of
algorithm. And so my message here is, you know, following, following my greed here, who was saying,
this is not a pipe. This is our picture of a pipe. I, I think that a lot of the, um, arguments
about whether or not living things are machines and so on, I don't, I'm not even sure machines
are machines anymore. I think that there is so much surprising, um, uh, not, not just complexity,
not just unpredictability, but, but actual cognition at different levels, problem solving,
behavior, preferences, memories that come from very minimal setups that, um, I think we, we need a lot of,
uh, a lot of humility in, uh, looking at these minimal models and saying, well, I know what the
algorithm is, or I know what the chemistry is. So I know what it's going to do. I, I think it's,
the life is much more interesting than that. So, um, I will end here. And just to say that,
I think intelligence is pretty ubiquitous. Um, we need to get better at observing it in unfamiliar
environments. Um, I think that we have a research agenda here, which, uh, is to develop principal
frameworks, uh, that try to get it right. As far as, um, what kind of mind we're looking at, uh,
by, uh, loosening up, uh, some of our, um, uh, kind of evolution, some of our own evolutionary, um,
firmware. And, uh, in the future, we have all kinds of exciting, uh, things around, um, developing
these models and using AI as universal translators. Uh, so, uh, you know, there's, all of this is discussed
in extensive detail. I can send this around if people want, um, I need to do a disclosure. There are
three companies that, uh, are funding some of the work that I told you. Here are the amazing people,
the postdocs and the, and the PhD students and our collaborators that have done all this work.
And I will stop here. Thank you so much.
