Okay, welcome everybody. This is ProSocialWorld's research seminar series. I'm Beth Hawkins with ProSocialWorld, the research director, and I'd like to introduce our guest of honor, Mitch Diston.
So, Dr. Diston's interest lies in the intersection of evolutionary science and indigenous spirituality.
He has a PhD in ecology, evolutionary biology, and biodiversity from the University of Valencia in Spain, Master of Science in the history and philosophy of science, and a BS in neuroscience.
Mitch wrote his PhD thesis on the intersection of evolvability and multilevel selection from a historico-philosophical perspective.
He's currently in the process of writing a pop-sci book on the social and spiritual implications of multilevel selection theory.
And his thesis won several awards and has since been turned into a free ebook available on ResearchGate.
A little plug for Mitch.
Cheers, lady.
And he's also interested in taking a lead role in forming a new community within the ProSocial World Commons on a nature or scientific-based spirituality, which we all think is a fabulous idea.
And let us know if you're interested in being involved, specifically Dunia and Mitch.
So, without further ado, please, Mitch, if you'd like to share your screen and-
Yeah, sounds good.
And your brilliance.
Sounds good.
Let me just try to get this on time.
Okay, how's that look?
Perfect.
That's good.
Good.
I just got to switch this around here to put it on my big screen.
Okay.
Awesome.
All right.
Well, thank you and welcome.
Bienvenidos.
As you very well put, thank you for my introduction there, Beth.
Mitchell Ryan Disson, otherwise known as Mitch de Michigan in España.
And it's a true pleasure to be speaking in front of all you today.
I'm very new to the ProSocial community, but I'd like to become a more active member, most certainly.
And you know what's kind of funny about the situation, though, is that I've somewhat jokingly referred to myself as Wilson's Labrador.
Over in Europe a few times, which is kind of a nod to Thomas Huxley being referred to as Darwin's bulldog.
Mostly because I do try to champion MLS theory over in Europe.
And but my friends don't think I'm so much of a bulldog.
I'm a little bit more cute and cuddly like a Labrador.
So yeah, that's with with this being said, I do diverge with David on several issues of merit that I will hopefully get into today.
One being that I don't think MLS was a tenable theory until the past 10 to 20 years when we started to finally look at evolution dynamics over longer timescales and given more frequent spatial changes.
And also from personal conversations I've had with a lot of evolution biologists, especially evolution ecologists, I believe most evolution biologists see MLS theory as theoretically possible.
They don't largely largely largely due to your work, though, David, but they do not see the they don't see it as entirely empirically sufficient enough to refer it to as a theory yet.
So my initial aim when I started, you know, researching 10 long years ago, which my graduation from MSU was to create the best available argument for MLS theory using what I see as the best empirical example of higher level selection at play, which is evolvability.
So that's what I'll hopefully get into at this first part of this presentation.
And so, yeah, for the last decade, I've been traveling around the world while concomitantly finishing my schooling.
So I started at Michigan State University, went on to UCL, did my PhD at the Universidad de Valencia, and then I worked for a little bit in Cambridge.
And then while I was finishing my doctorate, actually, I was traveling almost full time.
And that's why I chose HPS as my, you know, discipline, because it allowed me to travel at the exact same moment.
So through my travels, I lived with several indigenous communities in Mexico, Guatemala, Egypt, and I hope to go live in Peru this this winter.
But I became struck with how much convergence and synchronicity there seemed to be between what I was studying in evolutionary biology, more specifically, MLS theory, and indigenous attitudes.
So I'm excited to show you that today.
So for the first half of this presentation, I'm going to go through my recent ebook, Evolution, Space, and Time, Second Synthesis, Ecology, Evolution, Biology, and the Philosophy of Biology, which marks the culmination of my last 10 years of historical, philosophical, and scientific research and attempts to tell the story of what's really
been going on within biology over the past century.
And so why did I organize my book in this way? Well, I believe the history of science suggests that there are three necessary elements to achieve theoretical progress in biology.
I believe the first element needed is an accurate historiography that correctly identifies the problem.
Second is abundant and sufficient evidence in support of the new view.
And the third is a pragmatic solution to solving the problem.
And I believe every failed program from the history of biology, such as orthogenesis, Lamarckism, or Wynne Edwards group selection theory, lacked in either one or more of these elements.
And I believe the ES today actually lacks in all three.
So the aim of my book when I set out was to achieve all three necessary elements of progress by being an empirically sufficient and scientifically informed philosophical reconstruction of natural selection theory.
So to begin our journey, we have to start by understanding the intellectual environment that really incubated early evolutionary theory.
And this intellectual environment, the defining scientific philosophy for most of the 20th century is known as logical positivism, what some may claim to be the first philosophy of science.
Positivists such as Otto Neurath, Rudolf Carnap, Carl Hempel, etc. were particularly impressed with the logic and mathematics and technological success of late 19th century and early 20th century theoretical physics, which was back then, of course, the paragon for the other sciences to follow.
They started a tradition known as the unity of science movement, which in its most egregious form held that all scientific terminology, laws, and theories should be reducible to physics in the long run.
However, in its weaker form, the movement to unify the sciences approach scientific phenomena using explanatory strategy known as explanatory monism or reductionism.
Which is the favoring of one type of explanation, which is monism or one fundamental level of explanation from which others can be derived or reducible to which is reductionism was often the result of emergent phenomena being reducible to lower level events.
This is a brilliant book that kind of goes into a little bit more depth on this by Sandra Mitchell.
I'm sorry that these pictures didn't quite come out the way that I would have hoped, but it's called biological complexity and integrative pluralism.
So I highly recommend reading that book and so early biological methodology was fashioned after physics, because this is just how everybody thought we should do science before an era that we conventionally know as the modern synthesis.
synthesis most historians refer to it as a modern synthesis between the the the periods of or the dates of 1918 and 1956 biology was largely seen as a second science and an inferior science.
There are many competing theories of adaptation, not just natural selection theory, but also ortho genetic theory in the mark ism and we had a divided biology most of the sub disciplines of biology weren't really under one coherent theoretical framework at this time.
So, after the modern synthesis evolution biology and biology more generally became seen as respectable scientific disciplines.
There was a universal acceptance of natural selection theory amongst biologists and biological knowledge became integrated into a coherent theoretical framework that brought together all the previously sub previously divided sub disciplines of biology into under one conceptual theoretical framework.
And so what really caused all these significant changes to occur during this era.
Well, primarily the adoption of a robust mathematical program that quantified evolution, otherwise known as population genetics lent evolution biology a new legitimacy within the broader intellectual zeitgeist of logical positivism.
A new biological methodology was to be fashioned after the acceptable sciences of Newtonian physics and chemistry, while also allowing biology to preserve its autonomy from the sciences.
All three of the founders of population genetics.
All three of the founders of population genetics are a Fisher CEO right and JBS Haldane.
We're attempting to bring biology on par with the physical sciences and drew explicit exemplars from these exact and rigorous sciences.
And this was how the population geneticists modeled evolution change at a population level with the four calls of forces of selection mutation migration and drift acting on pop acting on individuals within a population to cause evolution change.
And this was how I was originally taught evolution at university and many still do teach this today.
However, there are numerous issues with teaching evolution this way, especially when it comes to causation, most primarily because all these calls of forces don't act independently of one another.
And, and it's a lot more nuanced of a causal model than what we typically what population genetics typically allows for.
So i'm not going to go into broad depth here.
We can come back to this in discussion if we want, but most probably I want to notice mutation down here.
Much or most de novo mutation and likely and standing variation are likely modified or maintained by natural selection.
So what we actually need is more of a reciprocal causal model of of natural selection, because natural section can actually act on mutation modifiers, and then thereby increasing its own causal efficacy.
So, yeah, I believe this is why we need to move away from a traditionally mathematical model of natural selection to view natural section in terms of ecology.
Because only with a greater appreciation of the selective pressures causing natural selection, can we understand why natural section operates in a certain way as a causal theory.
And so the big main reason why we can't use the same explanatory strategies as physics is due to the messy causation inherent in every biological system.
Most biological phenomena are variable in space and time, and the causal effects of biological traits are nearly always make multifactorial.
Now, they ensue at multiple levels of biological organization with upwards and downwards causation, and they all come with a complex evolution back history that was likely instantiated by every evolution process.
Add on to this the fact that organisms can influence their environment and vice versa, which is known as reciprocal causation.
Yet, most importantly, we also have to consider the capriciousness of ecological variables, as I will discuss in greater detail here in the following.
Thus, the messiness of biological causation is precisely the reason why we cannot fashion biological methodology after physics, why we cannot use the same theoretical and explanatory strategies to explain our causally complex phenomena.
Which leads to the fundamental idea of evolution, the idea of change. Evolution is about biological change over time.
It is a surprising historical fact that for the majority of evolutionary research, we have rarely studied how evolution typically unfolds in nature in changing ecological environments over space and time.
And I actually modeled this claim off of this quote taken from the father of ecological genetics, E.B. Ford, who noted how rarely we studied evolution dynamics in the wild.
And that was in 1964. But I don't believe that we actually accomplished this until the last 40 years, truth be told.
And so this is the primary insight behind what I see as a second major biological synthesis, what I refer to as the second synthesis, because I think we are undergoing something of an empirical revolution in biology over the past 40 years.
You see historians and biologists are quick to note the relative disconnect between ecology and evolution biology, exemplified in this quote by Massimo Pigliucci here.
So I'm gonna read this quote in full. The modern synthesis basically ignored ecology, despite a strong research program in evolution ecology, so much so that ecologists and evolution biologists now hardly talk to each other.
We have no organic theory of how community ecosystems ecology are connected to evolution biology.
Yet while there is some truth that for the majority of the institutional histories, ecology and evolution biology have developed somewhat independently of one another, largely because ecologists and evolution biologists typically publish in different journals, attend different conferences, and divide interdepartmentally.
However, I find the history to be so much more nuanced than what most authors imply.
That is, in the rare occasions where ecology and evolutionary biology have dated, dramatic theoretical progress has been the result.
Thus, while ecology did not play a major role in the early development of evolutionary theory through the vehicle of population genetics, it did, however, play a much larger role in the overall acceptance of the population
genetic viewpoint of evolution during the modern synthesis.
And this progress is largely due to the background efforts of early evolution ecologists such as Theodosius Dobzhansky and E.B. Ford.
And largely Dobzhansky's genetics here published in 1937, because most historians consider this to be the trigger that ignited the modern synthesis.
And thus, early evolution ecology was particularly influential on early evolution thinking, but it did not begin to inform evolution theory until the 1980s, which is when we begin to
see an explosion of field studies of natural selection, largely due to the methodology methodological advance that spurred by establishing a quantitative standard to study natural selection dynamics in the wild, otherwise known as the Landian Arnold framework.
So as reviewed in John Lemler's natural section in the wild, we began to finally understand how evolution dynamics play out over longer timescales and frequent spatial changes, which is furthered by the establishment of the evolution rescue and eco evolution dynamics research front.
Thus, from the 1980s onwards, I think an entirely different and novel picture of evolution has come to the fore.
Hence why I see recent developments in evolutionary biology and ecology as another whole scale biological synthesis, because its underlying causes and consequences are similar to that seen in the first synthesis.
Thus, before the first second, sorry, before the second synthesis, we generally thought of evolution as a slow and gradual process.
Natural selection dynamics as they play out in the complex space and time of nature were relatively unknown, and the causal models or theories we constructed to explain evolution and natural selection were therefore largely abstract and reductive, because they had little empirical input from ecology.
Now, following the subtle and organic synthesis between ecology and evolutionary biology over the past 40 years, we now know that evolution can proceed at faster rates and thus on a similar timescale to ecology.
We have seen an exponential increase in our knowledge of natural selection dynamics expounded in all the recent reviews of field studies over the past 20 years.
We progress past the asking of is natural selection operating in natural populations to asking the deeper question of how is natural selection operating or what is the nature of natural selection.
Thus our first generation models illuminated how selection varies in strength and direction.
The second generation elucidated how selection and fitness varies spatial temporally.
And as a result of the second generation, we are beginning to understand how evolution plays out over longer timescales and frequent spatial changes, thus revealing long term evolutionary phenomena such as multilevel selection and evolvability that are once hidden in the purview of a reductive evolutionary biology.
Which brings me to the last point here in red, which is more prescriptive than descriptive.
Without question, we have recently experienced a massive increase in our knowledge of evolutionary and selective dynamics due to the second synthesis.
Whenever we see such a massive increase in our epistemic reservoirs in the sciences, we should meet such progress with theoretical reflection.
I therefore think we are existing in an intermediate stage of scientific progress that warrants turning all the new knowledge revealed by the second synthesis into useful and predictive theory.
This is where the philosophy of biology can be of great use, but I'm going to put that idea on hold for the time being and just get into a bit of the science background and the evidential background here.
So the paradox of adaptive genetic variation is the longest standing most severe explanatory problem in the history of evolution biology.
Because beginning with Darwin evolution biologists have routinely failed to explain the evolution of adaptive genetic variation mechanisms of sexual recombination mutation horizontal gene transfer genetic transposition and hold genome duplication events.
And this is an active problem today, which is why it's such a useful example to use to demonstrate all the known issues with evolution theory, because its severity shines a particular spotlight on the philosophical anachronisms that still pervade in evolution theory that we originally derived from physics.
Okay, so for a quick review here.
This slide shows the basic modern synthetic model of natural selection, or how we used to think the process of natural selection played out essentially the modern synthetic model saw natural selection as a two step process that ensues in a one way flow of causation from the first step to the second step.
So in this in the first process, you have mutation and recombination mechanisms causing variation, but it's important to note that they cause variation randomly, meaning that they aren't generally influenced by the environment, or that their subsequent phenotypic effects cannot be predicted, which is just fancy talk to say that mutations aren't directed, which I believe the latter sense of randomness has actually held up in the literature literature.
The second step is what we classically understand as natural selection, which is when an environment selects for the variants that are the best adapted have or having the highest fitness, while leaving or purifying less adapted variants.
But of course, as I previously mentioned, these two calls of processes don't ensue independently of one another natural selection can act on mutation modifiers, thus enhancing its own cause of efficacy to cause adaptation or selection for selection.
What's also wrong is the implicit assumption that was tagged onto this model from very early on.
That natural selection only causes adaptation at lower levels of biological organization, at the genetic level of selfish genes or at the individual organismal level, most prominently because our methodologies were limited to within population analyses for most of evolutionary research.
And so this assumption was born out of the intellectual context that Stephen Jay Gould referred to as the hardening of Darwinism, which is when reputable evolutionary biologists began to infer from their mostly statistical interpretations that natural selection only acts at lower levels of biological organization at the behest of lower level entities such as selfish genes or individuals.
This whole debacle, known as the group selection controversy of the 1960s, started when the ecologist Wynn Edwards posited that individuals may sacrifice their reproductive interests for population control, which was a good of the group or species type of argument.
Such a provocation moved several of the most reputable evolutionary theorists to specifically attack the idea of group selection, which led to a suspicion of all higher level and emergent phenomena in evolutionary biology.
Following this period, natural selection was universally seen to operate at lower levels, recurring adaptations that benefit selfish genes or individuals within a population.
And as you can see by this quote here, this idea continues to this day.
And so I'm going to read Jerry Coyne's quote here.
As evolution predicts, we never see adaptations that benefit the species at the expense of the individual.
But some of our best and brightest within evolutionary biology today still cling to this assumption.
However, there has been some dissension in the ranks to talk about higher level selection more openly in recent textbooks.
Hence why I do believe that this debate is still alive and active.
And quite interestingly, and this was one of my, you know, favorite things I found in my historical research was that the only exception to the individual selection assumption came from sex.
Sex was the only phenomena that even the strictest of reductive Darwinians, that was Ari Fisher, G.C. Williams or Maynard Smith, ever considered to not fit within their theoretical models of natural selection.
In my book, I go into more of the interesting back and forth between Maynard Smith and Williams first sought to explain sex within their reductive purview.
However, after repeated failed attempts, Williams and Maynard Smith finally conceded to the idea of higher level selection as the primary cause of force underlying sex in its maintenance.
And so here's a perfect quote by Grant Bell, who is a is a recognized expert in the community, as well as a set on my thesis committee.
Oh, wait, sorry. Going one too much here. Okay.
So this quote really sums up this era perfectly, I believe.
So it was the very success of this attack on group selection, which led population biologists to realize how embarrassing sex is.
Most supposedly altruistic behaviors were quickly found either to have concealed advantages for the individual or to be directed towards the welfare of closely related individuals.
But sex appeared to fit into neither of these categories.
If it permits the rapid mobilization of genetic variation, then this may be a matter of better concern for the population, but does not in itself concern the individual.
A evolutionary biologist thus found themselves on the horns of a dilemma.
Either the apparently unsatisfactory hypothesis of group selection was indeed an adequate explanation for the maintenance of sexuality,
or else a quite different hypothesis framed in terms of natural selection must be sought.
So as exemplified by Bell here, the unrelenting commitment of many 20th century evolution biologists to a reductive model of natural selection caused many of the same architects of this theory to notice an implicit and profound theoretical incongruency between natural selection and the available evidence on the evolution of genetic variation in particular sex.
The paradox of sex was thus officially recognized in the 1970s after reductive cause interpretations of natural selection became entrenched in evolutionary theory following the group selection controversy.
Thus, raising the origin and maintenance of sex as a major major explanatory issue for evolutionary biology that still largely continues to this day.
Because sex is still widely regarded as one of the major unexplained phenomena in evolutionary biology, mostly because it's incredibly pervasive in eukaryotes.
So why does sex present such a paradox to reductive theory?
Well, because sex is well known as an emergent and population level feature that is also extremely costly to the individual.
As it takes time and energy to find a mate, individuals only leave 50% of their alleles to offspring.
There's a significant evolutionary detriment to halving the amount of reproductive individuals in a species, otherwise known as the cost of males.
So why do we, why do we sex then, given all of its costs?
Well, sex does one thing in particular, and we've actually known this since August Weissman in the late 19th century.
The genetic mixing seen in meiotic recombination is known to accelerate and facilitate adaptation due to the novel genetic variation that it produces at the population or species level.
Empirical studies have repeatedly found a strong evolutionary benefit that comes along with out crossing or the interbreeding of unrelated individuals as opposed to self fertilization because of the availability benefits that it confers to higher level entities.
However, what is less recognized today is that adaptive mutation functions as the exact same thing as sex for much the same reasons coming along with the exact same explanatory issues.
So beginning in the 1970s and 80s, researchers began observing increased mutation rates when they place bacterial populations under stress.
And this began to erode the fanciful modern synthetic notion that all mutations are random and began to imply that selection may actually increase mutation rates when a population is stressed, despite deleterious effects to individuals within the population.
So the evolution biology community has undergone something of a bifurcation and models of mutation dynamics over the past 20 years with a non adaptive models of mutations such as Trent Drake's model or Michael Lynch's trip bear hypothesis.
Struggling to maintain the past reductive theoretical tenants of natural selection theory seeing natural section has only a force that decreases mutation rates to conserve individual offspring viability.
However, a new model has slowly and subtly been building in the literature known as the adaptive models of mutation that argues that natural selection can act to increase mutation rates.
So as increasing the probability of fixing an advantageous genetic variant and facilitating adaptation when a population is stressed or in a novel novel environment.
And so I'm not going to go into a great detail on all the empirical evidence supporting a lot of these notions, but one thing to note is just the long term survival and evolutionary rescue of sexual populations.
And the same goes with adaptive mutation here.
So the big idea behind the paradox of adaptive genetic variation is that adaptive genetic variation mechanisms are emergent adaptations that benefit higher level entities.
When placed in a novel stressful or capricious environment, therefore driving adaptation.
And this is not a new idea in the literature by any means, because this is how most evolutionary colleges and conservation biologists think species respond to environmental changes from either demographic rescue strategies, phenotypic plasticity mechanisms, or undergoing genetic adaptation.
And of course, genetic adaptation, subdivided into the three processes of production of novel variation, variability, conservation of variation and staining variation in the domestication of foreign elements.
By the way, can you see this, by the way, is this on the screen? Should I move this?
The videos, anybody?
No, we can't see the video.
Oh, okay, good. Okay, because I have like a snapshot of everybody on on zoom here.
So, okay, sorry. So all these three elements is what I refer to as genetic evolvability.
I'm not going to be able to go into precisely why I view it this way.
But I'll go a little bit into the research here.
So a recent meta analysis of 19 long term studies performed in the wild, published in science, by the way, in 2022 here, found a two to four times larger additive genetic variance in relative fitness, implying that genetic adaptation is a much more significant causal factor in the rescue of species than we previously thought.
Most popular most natural populations harbor an extensive amount of genetic variation.
So why is this variation there?
It doesn't benefit individuals, at least not in the short term.
It doesn't benefit selfish genes.
It's there because natural selection truly has foresight because of what has happened in hindsight.
Environmental unpredictability is the only predictability in evolution.
Hence why most species harbor an extensive amount of genetic variation.
So in light of all the recent evidence, how do we solve the longest standing explanatory problem in evolutionary biology?
The paradox of adaptive genetic variation.
Well, this is where the this is where philosophy particularly comes into play as we need the development of new theoretical and explanatory strategies to accommodate all the recent phenomena.
We need to pluralize natural selection theory so that it's not strictly reducible to causation at lower levels, but is capable of explaining adaptation at higher levels and over longer time scales.
We need to expand natural selection dynamics to include long term selective phenomena.
Thus, to finally solve the paradox of adaptive genetic variation calls for a pluralistic theory of natural selection that integrates several fringe ideas, including maintenance selection as a type of selection most commonly acting to maintain these mechanism mechanisms over time.
Species selection, species selection as a level that natural selection is operating at multi-level selection to explain how selection operates between various levels and evolve ability as a new higher level dispositional property that is a determinative selection akin to individual fitness or what selection is selecting foreign populations and species.
So why do we need to integrate these four elements.
So why do we need to integrate these four elements. Well, because it leads to more virtuous theory.
It increases our explanatory depth of theoretical coherency or evidential accuracy or causal adequacy and predictive power, which is, by the way, precisely what calls them needs.
And there's a beautiful book written by the philosopher I forget his first name but Schindler and it's in 2018.
It's on the scientific theoretical virtues, and I believe this is precisely how we need to compare and contrast theoretical arguments is by standard standardizing a lot of these arguments and talking about these theoretical virtues.
So hopefully we can go into a little bit more detail on the discussion on this.
So after going through all the sex and adaptive mutation literature, I started asking myself, what is natural selection?
Why have empiricists failed to see their results as clearly the result of higher level selection?
Well, one reason that I came across is how we've always thought of the ontology of natural selection, how we perceive natural selection as playing out in nature.
Here's a classic paper written by Richard Lawton in 1970, where he represented the core cause of field of natural selection, in which he argued that populations of individuals will undergo adaptive evolution change by natural selection.
When these three necessary and sufficient conditions are met, the conditions of phenotypic variation differential fitness and the fitness is heritable.
However, there are numerous issues with this ontological ontological model of natural selection, as it has difficulty when applied to complex biological settings.
It specifically focuses on short term selection dynamics, and perhaps most importantly, it only captures how evolution causes directional evolution or how natural selection causes directional evolution change.
And so herein lies the major issue with how we've been typically conceptualizing natural selection dynamics.
Perfectly exemplified by the man with the best facial hair in all the history of biology, GC Williams.
So I regard it as unfortunate that for that the theory of natural selection was first developed as an explanation for evolution change.
It is much more important as an explanation for the maintenance of adaptation.
You see, so natural selection, not only natural selection is not only a cause of evolution, but can act as a cause of evolution without actually causing evolution.
Evolution is about biological change over time, but species aren't always changing.
And natural selection can actually cause trait uniformity over time.
We have historically speaking been so infatuated with how natural section causes adaptive evolution change that we have completely forgot to ask what is natural selection as a causal theory.
And many long term and highly conserved genetic mechanisms such as the evolvability mechanisms previously discussed are kept around in populations through maintenance selection.
So this is my reworking of Lewontin's causal principles to accommodate such phenomenon.
And the cool thing is we don't need variation as a necessary precondition for natural selection.
Also, we need to say that an adaptation is an adaptation under maintenance selection is that the trait or feature is heritable.
And if the, and if this heritable trait is causally connected to the fitness at any level of biological organization, then the biological trait will undergo or is undergoing maintenance selection, meaning that the active ecological context is continuously selecting for this trait.
And any disturbance made to this trait will lead to disastrous effects.
And so here's a good empirical example of maintenance selection for genetic evolvability.
So in this study performed by Raghab et al 2009 or 2019 published in molecular cell.
The researchers inactivated the transcription coupled repair factor MFD, which is known to have a dual functionality.
So that in stable environments, MFD repairs DNA damage, but under stress MFD is known to promote mutagenesis.
So after, after inactivating MFD, the researchers found a significant decline in the microbes evolve ability or their, their evolve ability to evolve antibiotic resistance.
And I know one of the strains that they were investigating tuberculosis was found to be a thousand times less likely to evolve antibiotic resistance after MF after the inactivation of MFD, which is a really cool finding that has myriad medical potential.
And it's also important to note that MFD is highly conserved across the prokaryotic domain, as well as having a functional homolog in the eukaryotic domain, implying strong and pervasive selection for its dual functionality and evolvability functions.
And so this is also a recent review of not just this study, but another similar study to this in Nature Reviews Microbiology here, if you want to take a look.
So in the context of everything discussed about genetic evolvability, we also need a multi-level selective framework to explain how selection operates between various and conflicting levels of biological organization, or how, or how lower, lower level features such as stress induced metagenesis, or recombination affect the survival of populations or species over time.
Because evolvability is typically a population or species level trait.
And so I don't know if you are a Twilight fan, but if you are, you get this probably better than everybody else here.
This is what the research shows is how is how evolvability typically operates within a multi-level selective framework since stable environments typically allow individual level selection to dominate.
But when environments change higher level selection for evolvability becomes or becomes the major adaptive interest.
And so this is how evolved, but he plays out in nature as a higher level fitness determinant, meaning that natural selection does not only select for greater individual fitness measures and higher fitness peaks, but also for the flexibility to traverse the adaptive landscape and reach new fitness peaks.
So in my book, I've, I've attempted to place evolutionary theory within its historical and philosophical context, thus revealing the philosophical anachronisms that are presently weighing down biologists and impeding scientific progress.
The main issue I've noticed is that we have historically not looked at evolution in space and time.
We have conceived of evolution as a relatively static process that happens in relatively static environments.
Our methodologies only reviewed only revealed short term and individual level evolutionary phenomena, thus making our theory particularly reductive and not externally valid.
Now, over the past 40 years, evolutionary biology has undergone something of an empirical revolution whereby we now look at evolution, evolutionary and selective dynamics in the long term and over frequent spatial changes.
So putting it all together into a visual model here.
Number one here, this is how we have traditionally looked at evolution from the perspective of within populations and at shorter timescales in relatively stable environments.
Periods such as these natural selection will automatically tend to fit to place an emphasis at the individual level and or the lowest levels of biological organization, thereby selecting for enhanced individual fitness metrics.
Evolvability and other long term evolution phenomena are either a dormant due to low environmental variability or are be appear to be dormant simply due to timescale choice.
And so to hear an increase in environmental variability causes adaptive radiation to ensue in natural selection to select for higher level features.
During these periods, the evolution of quote unquote weird evolution strategies such as social cooperation.
The formation of new levels of biological organization and or evolvability becomes more likely.
Adaptive interest will tend to shift to the population or species, meaning that natural selection will tend to favor higher levels of biological organization and select for higher level fitness determinants such as evolvability.
Selecting for those populations of species that are capable of evolving to new environmental conditions over less evolved over less evolved populations or species.
Number three here.
Number three here.
This is during large, large scale changes in environmental conditions and when environmental variability and therefore selective pressures are at its highest peak, such as those seen in mass extinction events.
This is when we see the evolution of the weirdest evolutionary strategies such as whole genome duplication events, which are typically an evolution dead end in stable conditions.
This is this is also when we are the likeliest to observe cooperation evolving between unrelated species or the emergence of entirely new levels of biological organization.
This is particularly in the interest of environmental species, thathmm.
This debates are often working with elements of global problems, but rightly of course a process of all ethical issues in Brazilian value.
Some of salty things you are exploring some of these who have integrated growth or other enzymes that are about your future.
level conflict um over time that uh that conflict will dissipate and will be resolved following more
of these um more of these changes in environmental variability and so this is why i believe you
should never trust anybody who says something akin to natural selection is not a forward-looking
force or natural selection has no foresight or that natural section is primarily an individual
level phenomenon because i believe people who say these things don't understand the history
of evolutionary biology the philosophy of evolutionary biology the empirical literature
of evolutionary biology but most importantly natural selection as a causal theory
so that is the beginning of my first part of this presentation so now i'm going to get into
a little bit more of a speculative range i've only been working on this book for about the last two
months so this is probably not as well set in stone here um but uh but yeah as i was you know
performing my scientific research i began to think about the social and spiritual implications of
everything we've been talking about um and so yeah this is what i'm currently working on which is
hopefully um my my book called disconnected from nature modern science meets indigenous wisdom and
i'm just starting to send my proposal out to agents and publishers so if anybody has any connections or
can provide any help i'd be eternally grateful here um so disconnected from nature is my attempt to
reframe human history in light of our evolutionary history and as such it naturally corresponds with
invalidates an indigenous history disconnected from nature marks the culmination of the big history books
or the bold panoptic works that attempt to explain the whole sweep of man's history such as harari's
sapiens uh jerry diamonds guns germs and steel fukuyama's the end of history uh stephen pinker's the better
angels of our nature which i don't think is a very well-written book um and david graber and david
wen grows the dawn of the dawn of everything and so i also hope to juxtapose the lifestyles of
indigenous peoples in comparison to our own today in modern society demonstrating the areas where we
have disconnected from the vital outlets that once allowed for our physical emotional and spiritual
survival so as i was traveling around the world living in many different cultures one word
continuously came back to me and that word was disconnected thus i began to ask myself what is
the root cause or mo the the biggest cause in most of uh human suffering today um what is the one
cause that if ameliorated or amended would instill widespread progress irrespective of culture or
geography and the one answer i kept getting back was being disconnected from nature which includes
our disconnection from our natural origins as a social and tribal species and this also dovetails
with a lot of the literature of eco psychology and ecotherapy which is very interesting and
hopefully we can discuss a little bit in the um discussion so uh that's one of the first things
i need to accomplish to successfully make my case is to juxtapose the livelihoods of our indigenous
ancestors alongside modern life so lifespans of our indigenous ancestors were relatively comparable as
those who survived to see their 15th birthday could reliably expect to live well into their 70s
our ancestors enjoyed significantly more free time than we do today only spending about two to three
hours of work um day or yeah only spending two to three hours a day of work and uh with work only
entailing fun and rewarding activities such as hunting fishing and gathering resources um and then uh food
was both plentiful and more nutritious than modern diets and largely because of that modern medicine wasn't
really needed non-infectious diseases and infectious diseases were virtually non-existent social politics
were largely egalitarian with members sharing resources or else they would suffer social exclusion
or punishment in tribal social environment allowed for the evolution of morality in the selection for
pro-social behaviors and the purification of anti-social behaviors which i believe is particularly
relevant for the pro-social community because i believe um our early um tribal environment acted actually
acted as a selective sieve that selected for um you know moral behaviors and in purified anti-social or
psychopathic behaviors and i don't believe our modern social environment does that today and of course
for mental illness um since our ancestors lived under the constant protection of the tribe cases of
mental illness such as depression or anxiety were extremely rare and in the occasional cases when they did
manifest other tribe other tribal members often celebrated encouraged their presence seeing them
as signs of an intuitive power and higher state of knowing that which is only bestowed upon medicine men
and shamans and thus uh before we go any further i want to talk about the elephant in the room i know
several of our participants today uh also we're talking about this yesterday in the evolution philosophy
group um the naturalistic fallacy as well as the appeal to tradition fallacies um so while i do believe
that it's true that just because something is old and natural doesn't imply that it is true or good
um however if something is order natural then it does have a greater likelihood of being true or good
and i don't mean older natural in the sense of 5 000 year old mesopotamic anthropocentric monotheistic
civilization based beliefs i mean old natural in the sense that they have been around for tens of thousands of years
passed down from generation to generation by our by our indigenous ancestors who understood nature
because they were connected to nature since the likely deep branching of the homo lineage from
its primary basis over 2 million years prior every person has an indigenous ancestor if you go back
far enough hence why these fallacies aren't fallacies but merely just her heuristics
and why what i observed in indigenous communities with a greater sense of physical emotional and spiritual
well-being largely because they are connected to nature although profound cultural differences
exist between modern indigenous cultures common interweaving thread between all indigenous communities
is their belief in an ecocentric world view or what's sometimes referred to as kin-centric
ecology which is when humans view both themselves and nature as part of an extended ecological family
that shares in ancestry and origins in a similar vein indigenous communities are often egalitarian
because they also viewed their sense of self as living in other tribal members this is a brilliantly
written book by the war journalist sebastian junger here goes into greater depth on this topic
okay so in human evolution history the two major uh world views or ontologies as i refer to them
are ecocentricism and anthropocentricism in which ecocentricism refers to the belief that ecosystems
have inherent value whereas anthropocentric philosophy suggests that humans are the most important entity
on earth every major philosophy today can be traced back to one of these founding ontologies and in
particular capitalism nationalism and imperialism are all are all founded within an anthropocentric
worldview and i believe modern science is beginning to validate an ecocentric ontology of the world
however despite their salience indigenous perspectives have been largely misunderstood over the past few
hundred years mostly because early anthropologists failed to live with and appreciate indigenous
people in person for example eb taylor the founder of modern day cultural and social anthropology
performed what we call today as arm fair anthropology where he argued that darwin's ideas of evolution
could be applied to human societies as he classified religion according to their so-called level of
development therefore imparting um some level of directionality into the the social evolution process
which i believe doesn't also hold in in the national or the natural evolution process so hopefully maybe we can
get to talking that a little bit too um so he coined the term animism as a classification for all early
indigenous religions which was the first stage or the lowliest of all the religions according or along
an ascending order of rationality animism to polytheism to monotheism which was the most civilized form of
religion at that time and so from this perspective animism was the most primitive kind of religion while
european protestant christianity was seen as the most evolved of all the religions
and of course taylor's protege fraser did exactly the same thing but a little bit worse
thus animism was seen as the attribution of souls to all objects including inanimate objects however this
is a grave mistranslation of two converging viewpoints on one side the ecocentric perspective
perspectives of the indigenous who did not view biological processes under a materialist or cartesian
mindset in which there was no separation between the immaterial spirit or supernatural world in the
real scientific materialist world anthropologists have thus largely failed to understand indigenous
people because they did not live among them and understand them interestingly if you've ever done
psychedelics you would come to understand how and why indigenous people believe all things have souls
which is why i won't go into uh great detail on this here but perhaps we can also discuss this
later because this is also quite an interesting part of the history um thus when we compare the lives of
our ancestors relative to modern life today one cannot help but ask when where why and how did humans
become so disconnected from nature so in a similar vein to jared diamond and francis fukuyama i think the
first major turning point of human history was the advent of agriculture or rather modern anthropological evidence
suggests that certain people forced to evolve an agrarian lifestyle lifestyle following the last
ice age and insignificant environmental changes so as people were forced to finally settle down in one
area to watch their crops the production of the first food surplus led to materialism as a philosophy
now that people could farm and sustain themselves as well as build personal property they were no longer
in need of a tribal unit so they became more individualized but having more things and being more
individualized allowed the opportunity for bandits to come and steal your things which is likely why
cities with big massive walls were invented now with a physical barrier in place man became more
disconnected from nature than ever before and thus to sustain the massive influx of people living in
cities cultures needed to evolve sociopolitical tools to enhance group select or group cohesion and as
what i'm referring to as sociopolitical tools are i see them as social social developments um as
adaptations um since they were no longer living under a tribal mentality i believe this is why they had
to evolve these sociopolitical tools um and so this began to the start of a massive zero-sum game in
which those cultures who could invent the best methods for enhancing group cohesion will become the most
likely to survive proliferate and dominate weaker cultures by the way everything i'm discussing here is
one massive oversimplification of the evolution of modernity i just want to make that known but it's just
i'm using it as a useful outline of how and why certain historical developments unfolded in the
way that they did kind of like a causal field of the evolution of modern modernity
thus one of the best new sociopolitical adaptations was the invention of a new world view a new ontology
otherwise known as anthropocentricism as a historian lynn white jr argued in his now famous essay the
historical roots of our ecological crisis the judeo-christian bible was one of the first documents to
explicitly give humans the right of dominion over nature since then since in the very first passages
of genesis it states that humans were created in the image of god and are constructed to subdue earth
and to have dominion over all other living creatures
man oh sorry anthropocentric stories viewed humans as fashioned in the likeness of god or gods
sitting at the top of arbitrary orders for example greek philosophers such as plato and aristotle
organized all of the earth's entities into the great chain of being seen here on the right and i
hope that it's on the right for you guys as well um a social which is a social hierarchy that
respectively placed humans at the top of a descending order above animals plants rocks and minerals
humans were considered as more important or godlier than other animals and animals were more important
than plants or rocks and the philosopher protagoras and emphasized the role of humans as a primary
focal for understanding the world when he wrote man is a measure of all things
and thus our disconnection from nature reached new heights in the early modern period during the
renaissance and enlightenment during the renaissance and enlightenment eras there was a renewed focus on
human reason knowledge and progress in western countries that was largely inspired by the redisco
rediscovery of ancient greek and roman knowledge and then meshing it with medieval religious zealotry which
was a very dangerous brew of two of the most anthropocentric philosophical doctrines during
this time and renaissance philosophers such as renee descartes promoted the idea of dualism which is
the belief that mind and matter are separate in the realm of the mind does not directly interact with the
world of matter and since dualistic thinking encourages us to see our minds as separate from the natural
world it has become easier for humans to view ourselves as a special and unique species that exists
outside of the traditional bounds of the natural world as a result lots of modern western thought
whether it be from science philosophy economics etc excuse me became highly anthropocentric all of
our supposedly good ideas about the world were centered around anthropocentric ideas and we began
to view nature as a machine under the viewpoint of instrumentalism where nature was seen as something
to exploit to meet human needs anthropocentricism and its philosophical corollary instrumentalism
became central and foundational tenants of thought in most western and modern societies during the
renaissance and enlightenment eras further disconnecting humans from their natural roots and origins
thus during the colonial era the massive carnage and exploitation of resources provided fuel for
the rising industrial economies of the european powers as human societies began to prosper or grow in
numbers they became more urbanized and shifted from mostly agrarian economies to industrial societies
and there's a growing emphasis on human control the exploitation of natural resources and the usage
of technology to shape and dominate the world this rise of mechanization and mass production brought
on a heavy reliance on machinery and manufactured goods factories pollution and urban sprawl disrupted
natural ecosystems and removed people from having direct contact with nature thus as a result of what i deem as
the around centuries of the 18th and 19th century otherwise known as the industrial revolution the 20th and 21st centuries of the
the 20th and 21st centuries are rapidly becoming the find out centuries since the 20th century humans have
upgraded our levels of disconnection to potentially perilous extinction type levels
thus in the grand scheme of things the notion that humans are separate from the natural world is a relatively recent and relatively
western intellectual development for most of our evolutionary history humans lived in a harmonious balance with nature
because they saw nature as a part of themselves under an ecocentric world view yet the development and
increasing popularity of anthropocentric western ideas has put us in a precarious position
and since much of western thought and philosophy from science economic sociology and political science
holds its roots in an anthropocentric world view rather than an ecocentric world view the entire
intellectual edifice of western thought is founded on the scientifically ignorant world view
our socio-political structures our habits and ways of life and our attitudes towards nature and each
other are all founded on a remarkably disconnected world view and so in part two i shift from a negative
viewpoint of human history to a positive one elucidating the steps of the return to nature movement
in the sciences and the primary thinkers or players who began to question the monolithic foundations
of anthropocentricism so quite interesting modern quite interestingly modern science was primarily founded
as an attack on specific aspects of anthropocentric philosophy for example galeo giordano giordano
bruno and nicholas copernicus challenged the powerful orthodoxy of geocentricism which was a corollary
of anthropocentricism and posited a heliocentric model of the universe
in his now famous essay discourse on inequality the genevan philosopher and composer jean-jacques
rousseau was the first to forcibly argue that the development of agriculture and the establishment of
property rights created massive social inequality in a separation from nature he believed that the
transition from the natural state or from the state of nature which was hunter-gatherer ecocentricism
to civil society came at a significant cost individuals who entered society became subject to laws and
institutions written by men whom they did not know they become they became alienated from the natural
state and most importantly they lost the essence of humanity and morality itself in short society
constrains and suppresses our natural instincts towards morality and pro-social behaviors that once
existed in our answer in that once existed in our ancestors and then came darwin who humbled mankind
and reminded us of our forgotten ancestry and origins with the rest of life with his idea of descent with
modification which recognized the fact that humans are not separate or specially created species
and such a profound realization shifted our perspective from seeing humans as distinct from
nature to viewing them as a product of natural processes however darwin's theory of natural selection
which is the most important theory in biology comes with the added corollary that most people fail
to recognize and that is that humans are not fashioned in the image of some anthropomorphic god but rather in
nature itself nature is god so to speak natural ecological environments select for beneficial
characteristics and purify disadvantage disadvantageous characteristics in species thereby
fashioning us into who and what we are today so what i'm describing here is taking the idea of
natural selection and looking at its spiritual and existential consequences and and those are that
humans were formed in nature with nature being our grand creator so to speak
however darwin was was an imperfect or darwin was imperfect as a thinker being a product of 19th 19th
century victorian england he openly denigrated indigenous populations for being uncivilized he was
also a product of reductionist thought in early biology before it was called biology and characterized
evolution in the context of nature red and tooth and claw i.e. as a struggle for existence both mistakes
that left his theory of evolution and natural selection open to misinterpretation by future social
social and political theorists thus darwin's ideas were taken misappropriated and misinterpreted to
an extent as support for racist socio-political narratives such as social darwinism or the eugenics
movement the darwinian survival of the fetus competition-based viewpoint of evolution championed
laissez-faire capitalism and other ecologically disastrous public policies in the words of the social
darwinist himself ernest heckle who said politics is applied biology and what's interesting here is
that i do agree with him but i do not agree with how social darwinists have always conceived of
evolution thus in the in the 1960s and 70s a new picture of evolution has been building in the in the
literature biologists such as uh our our own david sloan wilson or um eo wilson have built a solid case
against the traditional darwinian competition-based viewpoint of evolution and have expanded darwinian
theory to accompany entire populations or species otherwise known as multi-level selection theory
what this means is that our our environments don't merely select for the most adapted individuals but
also for the most adapted populations or species our being our very existence or our sense of self if
if you will lives at multiple levels of biological organization and this is why pro-social behavior
such as altruism or trust have evolved and can readily evolve given the right environmental context
because those population or species with greater amounts of altruism or trust will eventually
outcompete those that are more selfish over the many courses of time and around the same time that
mls theory was gaining traction amongst biologists the mother of the micro world lynn margillus was
also attacking the darwinian competition-based viewpoint of evolution from a micro perspective
margillus's empirical investigations led her to challenge the orthodoxy of darwinism from the vantage
point of microbiology and as the micro world seemed to suggest that evolution was less about competition
between biological entities as we previously assumed but more about collaboration and collaboration
between completely unrelated species such findings led margillus and an english scientist named named
james lovelock to conceive of a new way to look at life on earth called the gaia hypothesis named that the
greek goddess personified the earth gaia and the gaia hypothesis postulates that the entire biosphere on
earth is a synergistic and self-regulating biological entity in its own right undergoing the same
biological principles of darwinian evolution but on a larger scale and so the entire earth's ecosystem
seemingly interacts just as that as a living breathing interacting and interconnected system
and humans are very much a part of that system it follows from the gaia that humans exist as
supporting actors in a play that is so much bigger and more magnificent than merely our own actions
humans thus in short new ideas from the frontiers of modern biology including but not limited to
multi-level selection theory and the gaia redefine what it means to be human and in turn they should
inspire us to rethink our social organizations mls theory radically radically alters how we look at
and treat our fellow human beings and the gaia radically alters how we look at and interact with nature
most of the socio-political ideas in modern western society however are predicated on an anachronistic and
scientifically debunked viewpoint of biology we must thus incorporate modern biology into our future
if we are to ensure our learn our our long-term success as a species and similar to our indigenous
ancestors we should view our sense of self as existing in nature however unlike our indigenous
ancestors who are sometimes violent against other tribes we should also view our sense of self as
living in other humans within our species we now have the intellectual tools to see ourselves in others
so let's see that one for now thus i think we as a species must move towards a nature-based
scientifically inspired and ecocentric worldview in spirituality by constructing societies that more
closely resemble those of our ancestors we can we can we can reconnect with nature and fix many of
the ills that are associated with modernity we must borrow from the ancient wisdom maintained within
indigenous cultures and employ it in our modern context in conjunction with modern science to construct
a better world for all living beings and with that i want to say thank you to everybody um i'm just
learning gen z slang so this means big up slayers means thank you everybody you guys have been a great
audience and if you wouldn't mind i just started my go fund me for this book a few days ago so if you
wouldn't mind donating um i most of this money will be so i can write this book in the next year or two
and as well as go live with the uh quecha people in peru um and yeah live within more indigenous communities
so um with that i believe we can start our discussion and i really appreciate you guys taking the time to
hear me out oh great that was awesome how did i do on timing by the way oh you had a lot to say so we're
fine we have uh we have uh 22 minutes left to go in our allotted time and uh and for those who want
to stay we can go we can go longer let's uh let's stop sharing the screen so we can see each other
again this is our research seminar series which allows us to geek out as much as we want and so i
hope we all enjoyed our particular geek out experience um and uh there's so much to say um and i was um
um raise your yes yeah raise your raise your virtual hands to form a queue um and gosh i don't even
know where to begin um so i hope someone gets began so someone else raise their hand and begin
the questioning and i'll collect my my uh my thoughts
don't be timid now i can't particularly see anybody so if somebody sees somebody okay here
we go so i can uh bathroom i can here we go now we're lining up here so steve and then marilyn good
hi um i would like to hear more about your view regarding animism and you had shown a slide regarding
how that um if i recall correctly brought how that view in indigenous communities
helped establish pro-social behavior in those communities
how animism in particular established pro-social behaviors right and i have a sense of that both
so i'd like to you mentioned when you showed the animism slide that you'd like to maybe dovetail back to
that um yeah yeah more about that so i'd like for you to hear your um your thoughts on that in more
detail well i i don't know precisely how to answer that at the moment because um the the main thing
that i believed um has allowed for pro-social behaviors has been maintaining that social tribal
unit or a community level unit um that that acts as a selective seed for pro-social behaviors and um and then
purifies disadvantageous um behaviors however uh i i there is probably some senses where animism
um as a whole even though i i believe it's more it's better framed as ecocentricism um i i do believe
that that uh allows more uh better spiritual as well as uh social and physical well-being and i believe
this is the the entire literature behind eco psychology that's looking at this and ecotherapy at the moment
showing that uh humans really do need to be in connection with nature um so in that sense i
believe it does encourage a lot of pro-social behaviors um but i don't the main thing that i
was talking about disconnected from nature was was was maintaining that community unit um as a as the
primary social unit um so yeah i don't know if that answers any of your question at all but
um it does somewhat yeah i should i should also note too that most anthropologists today i i forget
who is our one anthropologist here today so i really hope that she can speak up and help me here um but
most anthropologists today actually in the 1960s i believe they stopped using the term animism just
because of its uh con it's somewhat racist connotations um so now today i think it's just like a a big
area of research um but i'm as the one uh slide shows i do believe that they that a whole lot of
at least a lot of philosophers don't um you know give a lot of time to this to this topic so i believe
we do need to talk about this a lot more okay great marilyn
yes hi um mitch thanks um it was a great presentation and all through it something kept
popping in my head so i just want to throw it out to you if you have any comment um you have an
evolutionary by a biological perspective on what appears to be an increasing amount of gender fluidity
um i don't have you know scientific proof of that but it certainly appears that gender fluidity is on
the rise and i've even read some recent articles about it appearing in nature among
other species so um you know i through contemplation or reflection i have my own
perspectives and theories i'm just curious to know if you've given it any thought and do you have a
perspective on it yeah of course of course i've given it a lot of thought but i don't believe uh i've
nowhere even close to an expert on this topic and i don't think i actually i think i'm quite ignorant on
this topic um so with that being saying i i know that there are explicit examples of of of of course
hermaphrodites in in nature um but also having you know that that gender fluidity at the exact same
moment um so this is not something that i'm particularly knowledgeable nor from a political
reason i just don't feel like i am knowledgeable enough to talk about it so um yeah this is one thing
that coming this is so weird because coming back to the united states like i i would live i've lived
outside the united states for 10 years now so like coming back into like the tribal community
of the united states like i'm not a democrat or republican i don't really believe in either
sides and i don't know what's going on but once i got thrown back in this environment i was like whoa
i don't know what's going on so um yeah i don't think i have a good answer for that is is my best
answer so i apologize i know i know that there are several books on this by the way so i forget yeah
that's a it's one of many great great topics yeah of course uh david skip me skip you just okay for the
moment for the moment for the moment yep yes okay you are you are composing one of your great comments
so uh kate and then i'm going to take my my turn thank you so much mitch this is amazing um i come
to you as you know the director of the spiritual communities initiative at pro social world so you
can see that i'm a bridge builder as well between you know scientific and spiritual communities
realizing that we're really um talking about the same thing with different vocabulary um but i'm
also a historian by training so i'm really drawn in to your foundational approach toward history of
science and my limited exposure to history of science was that again two disciplines speaking
two different languages um how would you assess you know i mean i really appreciate where you came to see
um turning points in history of science where you know major shifts took place where would you
assess where we are right now in terms of um the the the shifts in culture that are
both deeply tribal and deeply troubling in terms of um the the the lack of um
decorum for lack of a better term are are you are you looking to current events with that or are you
um looking to um you know ground this in science yeah no uh i think that's a a brilliant question
and i think i've given this a lot of thought for for the first part that you were discussing here
um i believe that there is just a massive um because i of course i was when i believe that
there's just a massive spiritual void in in the world right now because so many people especially
young uh people are leaving organized religion and they don't really know what to believe in at that
moment um and so i do believe that you know sports teams uh political parties these take on this
tribal mentality and it gives these people the sense of self and this identity is social identity
um but i don't believe that it is the best way that we can organize um i believe politics should
be more played out at a community level and then we should have another higher level um at the at the
entirety of the of the species at that moment and i believe this is kind of what multi-selection
theory does in a sense is that it allows that though that intellectual tool to view ourselves as
existing at multiple levels um just because we we don't just have adaptations built into our genomes that
are there that benefit me mitch the individual that are but are there that benefit all of us
within a species and this is precisely what i was trying to get at in my first part of the talk is
that um you know we why we have all this variation is just because it benefits species to evolve and
adapt to novel environmental circumstances in in the future so i believe this is um kind of the the
the the way that we need to evolve to see ourselves as existing um you know as individual level
tribal community level species level but then also within nature oh that is music to my ears i'm
looking forward to speaking with you more mitch um yeah what you described is what what father
thomas keating who is a trappist monk uh who founded the centering prayer um he spoke in evolutionary
terms as the mythic membership um so within spirituality we have people that are thinking in evolutionary terms
within science we have people that have their own inner life and you know i just i want to join you in
um you know bridging this gap between what we see is speaking two different languages which is really
saying the same thing so thank you i'm looking forward to talking more yeah no thank you yeah that
is um that is great and um i have two kind of big areas i'm eager to to discuss i'll start with the first
one um uh i love your the part of your talk on the your biology part of the talk in part because of
course this is my area and i i i was a participant in it but i'm i over the last 10 years or so i've
been concentrating so much on on this human related stuff that i've lost touch with the biological literature
so i really learned a lot from you thank you about um your biological um uh literature and what i found
myself thinking is that something that you didn't cover uh very much was a dual inheritance theory which
is of course as as you know the idea that uh in our species there's two um um um
mecca two inheritance systems uh the the genetic stream and the cultural stream and to really take
that seriously i think um requires uh deriving the cultural analogs of everything that you said
biologically and uh including such things as recombination uh a directed component to evolution
and and so on and so forth so that's really exciting and uh and part of what we're part of what
we're doing and i'm reminded of of one of the very best uh colleagues in this is terry deacon and i
think you're probably familiar with his work um on the symbolic species um well he's coined this term
symbolically eusocial and that basically the glue that holds human societies together is not so much
genetic related that's of course that's a big factor but it's really the fact that we're all in any
particular group we're all thoroughly enmeshed in the symbolic system of that group and there's no
way to dissociate ourselves from that from the from literally from the cradle to the grave and the
cradle part and our child development from and uh from a cultural evolutionary um uh perspective
so i think that there's a um a whole field of of um of inquiry there but what does it mean for
there to be a cultural inheritance system and then for everything that you covered biologically
to search for analogs of that not too narrowly there does not need to be in fact there will not
be a point for point uh comparison we don't have to find memes for example that correspond to genes that
was one of the first kind of wrong turns of the dawkins version of of um of um of cultural evolution
but i guess this is more a statement than a comment i'll invite you to just to reply oh no i
i have plenty that i think i could comment on that but one thing i think that um uh has become
conventional for the study of cultural evolution is cultural group selection whatever people might
say about genetic group selection they say our species is a highly group selected species cultural
evolution takes place largely at the group level and so to me i think most of the people working in
the certainly in the richardson board tradition that includes people like joe henriac and michael
mutha krishna that's the the most successful school of thought um about human cultural evolution uh
the fact that we're a highly group selected species culturally um is pretty much carried the day so
not a not not heretical in that context um and i'd be interested in your own impressions on that
yeah no so first off i'd like to recognize that i'm a very much a newbie in this area because um i
think during my studies at least the last 10 years i religiously tried to stay away from cultural evolution
and i just tried to focus i i basically just tried to write my book in terms that a population
geneticist or or any geneticist can understand um but now i think of course going through everything
i think i started to apply it to larger context larger larger social context um but i'm i'm actually
i'm very i'm not very well read in in the field of cultural evolution at this point so this is why these
are very interesting things but one thing that i was um you know intrigued and i have been thinking
about um that that it does relate back to my evolution in space and time kind of thing the the
biological analog and the cultural analog with this it's just looking to evolution as a non-linear
process that is not actually a directional progressive improvement of society but recognizing that
how well adapted species is in one environment when environments change that doesn't mean that they
will still be adapted or that an adaptation in this environment is not an adaptation in this environment
and i think that this is really important to understand um in in the latter part of what i'm
talking about because what i what i originally see as initial social adaptations these these the the
the invention of the rule of law of monophistic religion and these things that increased um or
enhanced group cohesion i believe those were actually adaptations in a very um early form of our context
um but i believe now in our current context especially the fact that in our globalist world today and
given our also our um our issues um with global climate change i believe that these have turned into um
to to the exact opposite of adaptations i believe that this is um something that is quite disadvantage
quite disadvantages to us so um yeah that that is one way that i've thought of applying it um in the
book in in a sense that yeah what was once an adaptation um is no longer an adaptation and we
we shouldn't look at it at it as an adaptation and we should evolve um new adaptation new adaptations
to meet this new environment that we're in yeah great so much to talk about david are you ready or
see david do you want some more time if no i'm up here let's uh let my app speak for me okay
i did not realize this session would be almost entirely about biological evolution but i'll offer
my point anyway my own interest is in social evolution specifically the rise first of tribal
forms of organization then centuries later the rise of hierarchical institutional forms then more
centuries later the rise of market forms or organization and now lately the rise of network
forms of organization as societies learn to use and combine these four forms they increase their
levels of complexity and evolvability so i'm in agreement that multi-level selection matters
but i remain puzzled by how much emphasis mls theory keeps receiving it seems too insufficient to qualify
as an explanatory theory evolution is as much about new forms of organization as new levels
it is the rise and growth of new forms that generates new levels of complexity
not the other way around thus i'd offer that multi-form variation m
multiple i didn't get that last part i'm sorry wait wait there's more oh okay
if you want to put in the chat that would be helpful too no this is uh
i did not realize this session would be almost entirely about biological evolution
but i'll offer my point anyway my i'm sorry this no no no look look my my point is simply that
we need a multi-form adaptation theory go alongside multi-level selection
called even that i think yeah i mean first first you and then me um
well no i was just gonna ask if david could put it in the chat because i think i'd i'd understand it a
little bit better but also it's a question that i don't feel like an expert in so david if you do
want to take this away that would probably be i think that your talk was much about that i mean
your talk was a little bit about multi-level selection theory but it was also about such
things as the evolution of novelties and um and um and so on and so i think that uh you actually
address both and i in my own mind i think that multi-level selection theory addresses both so
so uh i mean basically the way we frame things is is in terms of generalized darwinism that in the
first place darwin and his contemporaries knew nothing about genes per se they talked they they
thought broadly about inheritance then we had the modern synthesis which i call the great constriction
where the study of evolution got confined um uh mostly to mendelian uh genetics and now we have an
expansion which uh and the best the best name for it is generalized darwinism that focuses on lewington's
three variation selection uh replication any process uh that combines those ingredients regardless of the
mechanisms are um um counts as a darwinian process and that opens us up to just about everything
personal evolution cultural evolution artificial intelligence all are darwinian um
processes that that possess the dynamic of multi-level selection which is that cooperation at one scale
is typically disruptive at higher scales so something that counts as adaptive for an individual or for a
tribe or they work well they qualify as some kind of organism but they do what organisms do to their
environment and to other organisms it's frequently conflictual there's negative externalities um and
so if you want to solve cooperation problems it's not enough to solve it at middle levels lower levels it
has to be ultimately the scale of the entire earth we have to turn the earth into an organism something
which does not exist now so guy does not exist the idealized form of guy does not exist in the current present
day um and it needs to be right existence so so that's the the brief year without going too far let
comment on that briefly mitch we'll return to maryland no oh yeah sorry no i was just going to say to the
last part i mean you said everything beautifully but actually um a lot of evolution biologists are working
on the gaia right now and i know in particular for do little is writing a book on the gaia and at least
like from a from an evolutionary biology and in an empirical standpoint at the previous moment so
and there's also a guy group going on in in nova scotia there and uh at halifax university and i know
a lot of philosophers of biology are working on this such as john ducre in exeter right now so i think the
modern literature is moving that way but i think we just need to define what exactly is meant by the gaia
and of course the notion of individuality plays probably the biggest role in in in this question so yeah
marilyn yeah hopefully this is a good follow-up question for you both mitch and david on what
you just were talking about i'm not a researcher but i consider myself a thinker so um can you tell
me is there currently a perspective amongst the cultural evolutionary researchers and the biological
evolutionary to realize that there's an interconnection between the two that actually culture
can influence biological evolution and vice versa that there's an interaction an adaptive
interaction between the two are they thinking broadly enough
uh yes for by all means at different time scales and one of the most interesting time scales
marilyn is the individual person that the way we think you know our symbolic systems interact with
our biologies our individual biologies through the upper regulation and down regulation
of genes um profoundly so i mean there's studies which show that meditating for example
up or down regulates a very substantial proportion of one's
of one's genes so there's a dynamic that takes place for the individual person
and then there's a co-evolutionary dynamic that that takes place multi-generationally all the way back
to the origin of our species that's how entwined uh uh they are and tayar de chardin has a beautiful
quote on that i can't quote it exactly but it's about the social matrix that surrounds the individual
child without whom he cannot be extracted without just incurring just complete damage to his being and
so there's no such thing i mean just human development takes place in a social matrix there's just no way
around it and there's beautiful work on that um uh i think that's um uh that's what do you have to say
about well the only thing i could add on to that was that um i know the philosophical literature on
causation is is really giving us tools to finally talk about this and this is when i was talking about
this reciprocal model of causation beforehand where natural selection influences mutation modifiers and
and vice versa um so i i believe that there are tools to you know start talking about this more but
i i i like i said i'm not as well read in the cultural evolution or social evolution literature so
i i wouldn't be able to make any specific claim but i believed i i know no matter what we we uh no matter
where we apply a lot of these um the ideas in the philosophy of causation um i i believe it can really
help a lot of people understand and explain a lot of the processes that they're trying to
um i just want to add a comment i hope you think it's uh interesting um i was yeah i was asking
about adaptation interactive adaptation of from an evolutionary perspective is evolution changing biology
to adapt to some of the problems that exist in culture you know just such as is uh gender fluidity
a response uh evolutionarily to generations thousands of years of patriarchy you know is there
it's just kind of an interesting thought process of evolution as this big thing of becoming and
constantly changing and evolving and i don't i don't think it's helpful to look at the individual
biological evolution separate from the cultural so i appreciate your comments on that thank you
yeah well with it with gender fluidity i i think that um there is a number of
quite different and complementary approaches one gets one is quite reductionistic and one possibility
is is that gender of course is influenced mechanistically by such things as hormones
and if you put hormone mimics all throughout the environment and you can basically get uh the the
response to that would be would be a degree of gender fluidity which is you would call it an
evolutionary mismatch it's not it's not adaptive it's a disruption of regulatory pathways um so there's
that whole piece but then there's also gender fluidity as a cultural adaptation and if you look for
example at the bonobos one of our closest primate relatives and the degree of sexuality that takes
place um among many many uh categories what you see is that is that sex is a social currency it's not
just a mode of reproduction it's a social currency in the animal world and in the human world and if for
example you need female coalitions to gang up against males to prevent violence by males so now you have
female coalitions often some of the social glue for those coalitions is not just such things as grooming
and so on but it's sexual uh behavior and you so there's many many examples of that in non-human species
because sex is a social currency in addition to a mode of reproduction and there's a whole diversity of
uses to which it has been has been put and so the cultural history of gender fluidity is like that
and that um so it goes on and on um uh like that and i wonder beth i i i have my second major comment
but beth please no you go ahead oh you go ahead please i don't i don't have a a brilliant comment though
i was um going to and i was just going to let folks know if they needed to hop off it's past
1 30 but we're more than happy to to stay on so i'm lowering my hand david and please if you pose
your question or comment well when when we really think of cultural diversity as like biological
diversity then it encourages us to think of single cultures as like a single species and biologists
when they study species as you know they don't do a lot of lumping in fact one of the problems with
early ecosystem ecology was too much lumping into categories like carnivores and herbivores or so on
whereas the more sophisticated approach to ecosystem ecology is to realize ecosystems are composed of
many species each species has an adaptive strategy it's an adaptive unit and then they interact with each
other and how they interact isn't necessarily adaptive in the aggregate in the aggregate so an ecosystem is
not automatically like a um a species so so when we take all of that and you move it over to the study
of cultures for one thing i think it should make one a little bit skeptical about the degree of lumping
that many people do and i think what you did also in in your talk when we talk about like indigenous
societies writ large or something or something like that where we really should be studying each and
every indigenous society as having a cultural evolution history a particular world view that
evolves in response to that and that world view in terms of who it serves is not necessarily respectful of
nature and not necessarily respectful of other people there's a real tendency to over-romanticize
any people and i think which ultimately in the first place it's just false and in the second
place it doesn't really serve our our um our purposes so you know why is it that the megafauna went extinct i
mean the native people were not so conservation-minded that they did anything about that colonization of
the pacific islands again and again it drove the extinction of the species which had no defenses against
um against humans uh you know tribes precisely as peter turchin uh in his wonderful work on human
history talks about the you know western societies cooperation always exists at a certain scale
above which you find warfare and and and indigenous people are no different and whenever there's a power
imbalance such as a new technology such as the use of horses or the use of of firearms then you get
imperialism you get empire and that was true for the first native american tribes that that
were able to use horses the first ones that got firearms and and why should we expect otherwise
i mean when the when the when the puritans arrived at plymouth rock they they have there were
indigenous societies that were what that were just um it was very recognizable in terms of the politics
that was taking place on this side of the atlantic compared to the and then the entire relationships
that formed were you know super political and there's all the scholarship you need to to um to
demonstrate that so it's so much more nuanced um and there is a very strong sense in which uh this um
ecocentric view and a more of a systemic view is a property of indigenous thought so i think so there's so
much to be done but for it to be done in a way that's true to the science uh the anthropology and
so on is what's needed and i think that um that's one of the things that um that um we need to do as
an organization is take the is is to is to take the lead of that so there's a lot there and i just
wonder what anybody here in this room thinks about that uh starting well i can comment more specifically
about it though so obviously um i everything i was presenting was more of a general view of how
things uh you know went on and this is not um this is only because of course is my first book that i'm
attempting to write so i'm attempting to generalize findings and not go through the entire history
because i think the best book that's done this recently is the dawn of everything by uh david graber
and david wengrow and so they they talk about that more nuanced version of of history and of course
i think with the megafauna i think with a lot of ecological destruction regarding the the rapa new
eye um i forget the what's the island easter island i believe there are a lot of instances in it as well
as with the mayan uh empire as well it's you can't always say that they're ecocentric in a in a in a
in a very broad term but they were um i think this is this is the big issue that i'm having is trying
to you know um say like what is the commonality between everybody but there is i mean there isn't
so much commonality because the cultures are so incredibly diverse there's a little bit of
commonality which you touched on so i think it's got to be done in a way where i recognize the historical
nuance um but also can can talk about this in general terms for people to understand um and so
this is one thing that i'm i'm thinking about making the claim as well is that a lot of these
cultures um who did go extinct and i know jared diamond talks about this more explicitly in his book
collapse um they went extinct because precisely because they were disconnecting from nature and what
they were doing was you know they they were um you know deforesting everything around them they they had
terrible agricultural techniques so which led to bad soil so i think that this is um one one area that
i'm thinking about you know talking about in more nuanced sense um but yeah i don't know if that answers
anything there but yeah i i i understand i understand that there is a lot more nuance to the to the
anthropological history here and so i i want to do it justice but do it justice in a way that i can still
write a popular science book about it and not you know make it dull and that's the balance i just have
to add a little codex a little codex on easter island because um one of my colleagues at binghamton
carl lipo and terry hunt have basically uh revolutionized uh that and the jared diamond account
of collapse on easter island is actually not correct and easter island it is actually a case of
sustainability so that's a beautiful beautiful piece of beautiful piece of um of um um of work
so cooperation does exist in that case um um uh well it's that it's that complex but um anyhow um let's
uh let's um see if we have some wrap-up comments and actually what we could do what's often a lot of
fun is to check out with a single word uh but first are there any other comments more extended
comments does uh does anyone want the last word before we before we check out with a very brief uh
single words i'll say one thing mitch i just wanted you to know that there there are lots of um
pretty great comments in the chat with some resources that that uh folks in the audience have
offered to you and i will be glad to send you um a copy of the chat so you've you have that
information if that's helpful perfect no i love that yeah i'd love to and um kathleen
well i just want to quickly throw out the fact that my thought about the role of consciousness
in human and cultural evolution and uh to not pose a question or unpack any discussion but to say
i think there's a missing piece in terms of understanding you know the link between individual
and group awareness of one another and consciousness and the kinds of um trajectories that uh i think
underlie a lot of our motivation and in trying to in studying and learning about pro pro sociality and
practicing it and and uh i just um which is why i put in the chat the comments about interpersonal neuro
neurobiology brain development and um awareness of one another so i'll just leave with that that
this is very exciting very exciting and in-depth presentation and thank you thank you and if you
haven't checked out the literature on eco psychology i know they go into you know great to talk about
that so yeah that is that's something i don't know so much about but yes thank you for coming
um well i'm i i'm just this is so exciting and to be to be actually creating an organization to
catalyze this um i think that many of your complaints about science that you voice in your
in the preface of your book oh man i was hoping you didn't read that well you know we've heard about
we've heard about renegade economists but now we have renegade renegade biologists and then uh that's
what i told dunia too when i first met her so yeah so uh so anyhow great to have you and i hope that
basically that that that you do become a member of your community you could become a very important
member of our community you have so much to offer and and um and so uh be nice to to do things together
as my as my uh as my checkout and uh shall i reel off some names steve would you like to do a really
brief check on um sure um there was a whole lot to unpack so i'm definitely going to watch the tape
and i encourage anyone who wants to um explore a different country go to peru i went um about two
decades ago and had a wonderful time engaging with um the quichon people and it's just fascinating um
delving into their world view
susan
my one word is gratitude thank you mitch thank you susan thank you um beth
thank you david uh mitch my one word is inspired and i do want to thank you for for reaching out and
and um and doing this presentation it was just mind-blowing it really was so thank you and um
maryland peace
and you're
yeah i'll i'll say intrigued um i was listening i was i was in transit so i was listen only so i'm
looking forward to watching the recording and seeing all the all the visuals and also just getting a chance to
uh to kind of uh digest it again but i've been thinking a lot about a lot of these same things
and so i'm i'm really uh excited to have met you and to see that there's other kind of fellow travelers
and uh and steve to your point i when i think back um i i sometimes wish i had i had done an
anthropology degree and instead of a business degree uh and and would love to do some of that kind of uh
uh beyond just like a tourist thing of like going to live with with uh with a tribe or going to see
what they're doing for like a day or something um so if anyone has thoughts or connections on how
how to do that in a more um you know outside of an academic context but in a in a more meaningful way
than just a kind of short touristy thing i would love to love to hear about connections on how to do
that well yeah that's interesting a little bit like what you envision doing for yourself and
there's the pachamama alliance and there's things like that but i think that uh um yeah lots of food
for thought there kate thank you so much my one word would be interdisciplinary yay um okay yeah it
doesn't count but really you know so often i've been told that we you know sacrifice depth when we go with
breadth and i'm really um just applaud your ability to go both deep and wide all right richard
fascinated is my word um i was just uh
jumping up and down inside listening to you doing your presentation and i'm sure i'll be following your
work for beer on out that's great yeah these deep dives are so are so great marilyn i think that you
complete our our group here i already gave my word peace peace to all you did give your word it was
sort of short that i i mean sorry kathleen hasn't gone i believe kathleen you are yes my dear in the best
sense of the word my one word is animated okay that's great all right so um all good so that
completes ourselves and then uh i might stay on if you have just a few more minutes uh mitch and beth
we can just do a little bit of a wrap up and then we'll say goodbye to the others until the next time
great thank you so much everybody have a great day bye everyone thank you guys
