Welcome back to Demystify Ascii. I'm Anastasia. I'm Shiloh. And today we are talking about what
it would look like to actually have a functional science. Institutionally speaking.
Institutionally speaking to some degree for sure, but also like are institutions necessary?
Is science an institution? What are the things that make institutions die and how can they be
revamped or revitalized into something that's functional into the future? And we've had a
bunch of these conversations. I would say that we probably talked to Jim Keller about institutional
birth, death, and decay. Samaburia. Ben Lando Taylor. So good. No, I just jinxed you on that. Ben Lando
Taylor. And it's just this thing that happens to be in the background of a lot of conversations,
because if you've stuck around here for long enough, you know that we're sort of skeptical
about the ability of current scientific institutions to be able to provide the kinds of
knowledge advancements that are necessary to power us through the next 50 to 100 years. Like I'm not
really quite willing to accept that the sun has set upon whatever you want to call the culture that
we inhabit. But I think that if the sun is too not set, that we have to figure out ways to make the
institutions that have been around for the last 400 years still function for us. And science is at the
center of that. And so with us, we have Jeff Anders, who is the leader of an organization called
Leverage Research, who has put a lot of effort into figuring out a cohesive story of the history of
science. And he's also involved with one of our other guests, Clarice Aiello, on her quantum biology
initiative, and is kind of also in like the crypto world and trying to figure out alternative ways to
be able to fund scientific projects that are happening on the outside of institutions.
And govern them. I think that's what we're going to find. We haven't had this conversation yet,
so we don't totally understand. But I think they're trying to use crypto architecture to
basically set up the administration of the program and how decisions are made.
Yeah, exactly. And so it's basically a group of people that are trying to do something that's
kind of audacious and well outside of the context of the way that we normally think and to talk about
science, which is academia. And so I don't think I really need to belabor the point. I think it's a
really interesting conversation. We left off on a really interesting point, which is, okay, well,
we've talked for almost three hours about how to make science go faster and how to make science work
better. And it's like, okay, well, how good do we want it to work? Is it a terrible idea to have a science
that's really, really effective at creating new technologies that screw with our psychology and our
society? Or is it best to figure out how to have a really effective science and then also figure out how to
apply really good breaks to it so that we're producing new technologies at a rate that we
can actually integrate them into society without breaking everything? And we don't answer that
question. We just walk right up to the edge of that and then call it a day. But if you guys enjoy
the conversation and you tell us in the comments and you tell us what other directions you want us to
explore, we'll have Jeff back and we'll be able to actually dig into the subject of just how far and
faster we go. Yeah. And he also has a bunch of research on his website about, I think it's the
psychology of belief structures, something like related to that. I really wanted to talk to him
about it. We didn't get to it. So I hope we do get to talk to him again. Remember guys, podcast is
entirely paid for by you guys, the listeners. We don't have any ads other than the ones YouTube slaps on
there automatically. We don't sell any products to you that other people make. We're generally committed
to making this a Renaissance project where we're paid for directly by patrons. So if you have the
smallest amount of money to spare every month and you enjoy the show, you find yourself listening to
it often, consider coming over to patreon.com. Check out what we got going on over there. It's a pretty
cool group too. You know, we get together once a week over Zoom. We hang out, chop it up about all of
our favorite subjects. We've started having some podcast guests come by. So that's a pretty cool little
perk. And you get access to the episodes early. But most importantly, you can rest assured that you
are making sure that this is not a project where we are trying to sell stuff. It is just a project
that we are trying to bring you the edge of what's known in all of these different disciplines.
And we're chasing our curiosity and we'd like to have you along for that ride. So check it out at
patreon.com. If you don't have any money to spare today, but you might tomorrow, great. You can share the
podcast with a friend, you can rate and review it. Make sure to subscribe on YouTube, give it a thumbs
up if it was a conversation you enjoyed. All these things do contribute to us ultimately being able to reach
more people and get better guests and build this into a more strong project. So there's a lot you can do.
And we have a really exciting announcement to make. If you've been listening to the podcast for a while,
you probably know that we are all about exploring the theories that challenge our conventional
understanding of the world. You will also have heard us and our guests talking endlessly about
how difficult it is for the academy to embrace these often far out ideas, even in the face of an
imminent paradigm failure. For example, everybody sort of realizes the data streaming out of the
James Webb telescope has kind of pulled the rug out from under the standard model of cosmology.
But instead of calling for a new theory, most academics remain hard at work on paradigm repair.
Almost all serious alternatives can only find an audience on the fringes. There seems to be no
institutional space for a conversation between those two camps. We believe that a healthier
scientific society would include both of these perspectives and more. Which is why we're bringing
together Alexander Unzeker of Unzeker's Real Physics, Eric Lerner of the Big Bang Never Happened,
Gareth Samuel of See the Pattern, Dr. Mike McCullough of Quantized Inertia, Dr. Andrei Kokotoris-Assis of the
University of Campinas, Dr. C.S. Anikrishnan of the Tata Institute of Technology, Dr. Andrei Nielbanek of
the University of Portsmouth, and others to discuss what lies beyond the Big Bang and the crisis in cosmology.
So this June 12th to 16th, Demysticon will meet in Cecimbra, Portugal at a gorgeous seaside hotel for a long weekend,
talks, panels, discussions, and mingling. Space is going to be pretty limited, but we really hope you will join us.
So check out the links in the description, or visit DemystifySci.com for more.
Keep that in mind. For now, enjoy the conversation with Jeff Anders, enjoy our exploration of the
history of science, and we will see you next time.
The scientific revolution starts now!
The DemystifySci Podcast!
Let us see him in the dark!
Do you guys know Samo Boria? Have you talked to him yet?
We did talk to him, but we completely fucked up the audio for that conversation.
I forget what exactly happened.
It was that the video somehow froze towards the end of the conversation, so we still had the audio.
I think we didn't have the computer plugged in.
It was something retarded, yeah.
But yeah, it was fun to talk to him, but we kind of screwed up that recording, so.
And we just released an episode with Ben Landau-Taylor.
Oh yeah, yeah. Both of them used to work for me.
Huh. Interesting.
What's Samo up to these days? You guys in touch still?
Yeah, yeah. He runs Bismarck Analysis. That's where Ben works.
And he's working on creating an atlas of all the world's players and institutions.
Hmm, that's cool. What exactly does Bismarck do, by the way? I've never really understood that.
Um, they do contract work for clients who want to understand some aspect of the political landscape
better and construe political broadly. So, like, maybe you want to understand philanthropic and
giving better. Like, who are the players? What are they doing? Etc. He's super good at that.
And then they...
Why would you want to understand that?
Is this, like, market maneuvering and stuff? Or like...
You could think of it as...
You could think of it as, yeah, if you want to understand your market, but you want to
go a bit deeper on the analysis, and then probably you'd contract Samo if you agree with some of his
major claims or major theses. Um, he thinks that it really matters how functional institutions are.
This is why I mentioned him, because he said all institutions die. And I'm like,
maybe, maybe, maybe. Um, uh, but he also has this thesis about live players, where the idea is that
knowing who is, uh, essentially an inventive or agentic person in terms of the landscape power will
give you a lot of information about what's going to happen.
Hmm. Hmm. Interesting.
I mean, I think everybody is really preoccupied with being able to predict the future, right? Because if
you can predict the future, you can put yourself in the right position to be able to be one of the people
who wins instead of loses. Because, you know, if you're some guy who's manufacturing windmills,
I always think about this, like, windmill manufacturers used to be one of the main
money-making operations on the frontier, because everybody dug wells, and in order to not have to
be able to dig or to pump the water by hand, they had windmills. And then within, I don't know, maybe
50 years of the frontier becoming populated and windmills being really big sellers, everything
was electrified. And so you didn't need windmills anymore. And so now windmills have, like, the yard
windmills have turned into these just tchotchkes. And so if somebody was around at the windmill
company and was like, hey, we should just pivot to making pumps or something.
Yeah.
They might still exist.
Yeah. A good example nowadays is AI. It's like, should you jump in? Should you invest? Should
you buy a bunker? Right? For that, you want to understand the technology, you want to understand
the players. Bismarck's a good place to go for that.
Interesting. I mean, that topic of the lives and deaths of institutions and, you know, how dependable
any institution is in the long run is something we've explored a bunch. We talked to, do you know
Jim Keller? He runs a bunch of startups.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
We had a conversation about that because he kind of has a theory that institutions have this
really parallel life cycle to human beings and kind of a similar trajectory where you spend,
like, you know, your twenties and thirties getting, like, figuring out how to do something.
And then, you know, the next decade, you actually put it into practice, next two decades,
and then you kind of retire, like, just kind of lean back on that for the last portion of
your life. Do you think that institutions can be immortal though?
Um, I think so. We obviously haven't seen one yet. The longest lived currently existing
institutions, the Catholic Church. Famously, they've had problems recently. They're still
immensely powerful and influential. I think so. I'm not totally sure, but I don't really want to give
up hope until I see a proof that institutions have an advantage over human biology. Happy we could talk
about that too, because I'm interested in the longevity question. But, um, with institutions,
you can, you know, you replace people. It's like replacing parts over the course of time. This is one
of the things that Samo highlights is the succession problem. If you can figure out... Ship of Theseus.
If you can, yeah, but in, but there's like this key part, which is who's piloting it. And so if you can
get the captain, you can replace the captain properly and you can replace them in a way that
they can solve the same problem. And then maybe, maybe you could keep the thing going indefinitely.
There's like the weird innovation crisis too, which is these corporations are often rocketed into the
stratosphere on the basis of some singular genius idea, right? Like Apple is a great example.
Even Google to some extent, but then the bigger the company becomes to meet its demands,
the less flexibility it has in terms of encouraging innovation. And you just kind of get this slow
stagnation. Yeah, I, I, it's certainly what seems to happen most of the time.
Um, I assume we're not recording yet. Are we recording yet?
Oh yeah, we've been recording since the beginning. Yeah, we are. All right. All right.
All right. Welcome.
Happy, happy to talk about any, any, whatever you guys are interested in.
Okay. So we'll check it out. I think that this question of institutions is deeply related to the
philosophy and history of science conversation that we're going to have,
at least in my mind. And so to, to connect it more explicitly, the question is, do you treat science
as an institution?
That's a great question. Um, I've just been rereading Kuhn's structure of scientific
revolutions and thinking about this and related questions. I think, I think I do think of science
as an institution. Um, I think about institutions as having been founded, created by some number of
people. So it's weird to think about science as having been created. Uh, but I do think that
the Royal society marks as far as this, I'm, I'm still learning. I'm learning about the history of
science. I think I, you know, understand some things. I'm looking forward to understanding a lot more,
but as I currently understand it, the Royal society was the beginning of science. And I think that you
can make a meaningful distinction between science and natural philosophy, which came before. So yeah,
I think science is obviously it's much larger than the Royal society now, but I, I do think about
science as being an institution.
What is that, uh, segregating wall between the two natural science or natural philosophy and science?
Yeah. So people will have heard about
natural philosophy. Usually it's referred to as, well, it was science before we started calling it
science. Um, but I think there's actually a, an important difference. The, uh, I think about
philosophy as being a more individual pursuit, obviously you can do it in groups, but you know,
the quintessential philosopher is like thinking this is an activity that they're doing individually.
When you look at works in natural philosophy, they're in treatise format. So they're,
you know, 100 pages long and they employ a huge range of different methods. And you could be looking
at observations. You could be doing, you know, long arguments. You could be, you know, there's all sorts of
things you could be doing. Um, and the audience for those things typically ends up then being individuals.
So it's, you know, you write your treatise and then someday someone picks up the treatise and they read it
and they're inspired or they're infuriated and they go and write something further.
That's a very individual centric activity. Whereas science, as I understand it, involves, uh, a group
activity where you have observations. And this is a thing that, you know, was done at the Royal Society.
You, you know, have the slogan nullius and verba take no one's word for it. You do an experiment and you
have an instrument, you produce an observation and everyone checks and can tell that they make the
observation. The people sharing observations and then mutually checking and correcting each other, I
take that to be the thing that defines science as an activity. And then that it might seem like it's a
small difference from natural philosophy, but I think the difference between an individual
activity and a group activity, they're, they're in fact very different. So I think science, you get
this grounding and observation and you get it being a group activity. So I propose that's the difference.
There's something about it that you're, cause philosophy and natural philosophy, I think can be the
study and observation of concepts more than objects. Like I feel like a lot of the natural philosophical
ideas of the spirit that imbues matter and the kind of alchemical spooky stuff that was a big part of it
has to be some measure reflected in the distinction because science all of a sudden stands up and is
like, well, no, like we start with the stuff, we start with the objects and then we have to task
ourselves with figuring out what it is that the objects are doing. That's the philosophy part though,
as far as I can tell. Like in every scientific paper, there's a paragraph at the end, which is very
philosophical where after everyone's agreed on the observations and the phenomenon has been, you know,
adequately inscribed or restricted, then there's this speculative phase we call the conclusion section.
But it's really, like I used to do this, I had to take a seminar in grad school where we would just
analyze these high impact papers. And it was funny because we'd go through all of the data and then
at the end, we'd read the conclusion and the conclusion rarely aligned with what we would have
concluded from just rigorously tearing apart all of the figures, you know. And so that seems like a
philosophical domain where you're actually adding this layer of interpretation and that kind of,
that's where things start to depart from this consensus idea where, you know, maybe everybody
kind of agrees on the conclusions, but not everybody agrees on all the conclusions. And so you actually
get this kind of individuation. Well, there's some, there, there is some individuation, I think you're
right, but there's also a sense of what is allowed to be said and what isn't allowed to be said.
So if you do an immunology paper and, you know, it's a cell paper, you have figures 1 through 15
panels, A through H in every single one that's like representing some case that you're making
and you get to your conclusions and you're like, ergo, we have proved that God moves within the animal
world. And in the immune system works by the hand of God. It's like, I don't think you could publish
that.
Well, it's gotta be a natural mechanism, I suppose.
That's, I think that's a really important key difference is that the, like natural philosophy
has the sense of like the spheres operating and science is this idea that it's like, no, it's,
there's something that is designated within the experimental system as being the thing that
explains it. Cause and effect are terrestrial and material and observable and manipulatable.
But I think Newton, the natural philosopher would have agreed that the mechanism has to be natural.
That's what the word natural means, right? Philosophy might be in some domain of
thought and like mind practice.
Can I actually ask you guys a question then? Because there's an interesting question about
what counts as natural. And you were just making a distinction with the sort of domain of thought.
One field that I've studied a whole bunch is psychology. And if you go back and look at
philosophers who comment on the mind, like there are a whole bunch.
So there's David Hume has his theory of the order of the train of thought. Plato has the tripartite
soul and has a theory of the different of the souls, the mind for Plato. You have different types of mind
that then correspond to different types of city state that you can have. And so does that,
what does that count as? Like, is that a type of natural philosophy? It's certainly, it always gets,
it's classified as philosophy, right? It's in a book where many, many different, you know,
subjects are treated. But yeah, how, how, but because if you think about Plato looking at the different
divisions in the mind, he gives arguments, he makes observations, he gives arguments. It's like,
you might think that you shouldn't eat the chocolate cake, but you are eating the chocolate cake there.
He doesn't use chocolate cake, but that nevertheless shows, argues Plato, that you have different
principles, different things in the mind that are, you know, cause and effect causing different things
to happen. So you have to distinguish the rational part from the appetitive part. And then he tries to
correlate those observations with observations about how cities work or city states. And so does that,
does that count as philosophy, natural philosophy? Does it count as science? Like what, what is that?
I mean, I'm not totally, I see the difference between science and philosophy that you're pointing out,
which is this, uh, group activity of it. Uh, but not the, like to roll this back to natural,
when I think about natural mechanisms or natural philosophy, I'm just thinking you can't point
and say it's magic that it happens. You need to show me a step-by-step mechanism by which the actors
pull off the actions that inscribe the phenomenon. So, you know, I wouldn't consider most quantum physics
to be naturally philosophically grounded. If you're saying that there's just some magic that happens,
like it's a particle and a wave, and we're not going to deal with what, what that means, then you're
not really doing natural philosophy anymore. Are we, no, go ahead. No, go ahead. Um, are,
is it okay to identify a phenomenon and then to, uh, with essentially the promissory note that you'll
figure out how it works. So one thing that like Newton, um, like Newton, you know, initially does
there, there's no postulated mechanism of gravity. Eventually with Einstein, we get a mechanism sort of,
I was thinking of, yeah, well, uh, well, it's good. It's still just like a quantitative description
of what's happening. It's not really a mechanic mechanism. You don't think, you don't think the,
the bending of space counts as a mechanism? I fucking absolutely do not. I mean, it's like,
I'm sorry, you've just wandered into like our favorite dead horse.
I mean, only big only because it's not like a physical theory has to have physical actors that
do physical actions in order to provide an explanation for the phenomenon. So
if you start warping ideas and applying physical transformations to concepts,
then you're in the realm of analogy and it might be accurate and poetic, but you're not
actually giving me a natural mechanism by which something occurs. So it's like, it's okay. Like
I'm open to the idea that the universe operates through magic. Like if you want to go down that
road, just be honest about it. Like, let's not pretend that it's a natural mechanism.
I was thinking of the history of electricity. Um, because even though people think they have
mechanisms at various points, they really don't for a long time. And, uh, I think the,
I'd be interested in, in, and I know you're supposed to be interviewing me, but we can sort of,
how are you guys? I mean, we try to just like, we try to like, not do it. We try to do conversations
more than, more than interviews. Yeah. Well, so then I, I would, I would want to understand how do you
characterize magic? When I, when I think about magic, I don't just think of mechanismlessness.
The reason for this is that there's an infinite regress problems with mechanism. So if you have it
be the gravity works by gravitons, then you're like, how was the graviton emitted? And if you're
like, here's the equation, you're like, great. That explains the pattern by which the graviton is
emitted, but how precisely is it emitted? If you go all the way down, you're going to find that for the
last, you know, the last joints in your mechanism, there won't be a mechanism.
So I don't think about magic as being mechanismness, mechanismlessness. When I think about magic,
I usually think about it as relating an important way to the human spirit or will, where, you know,
you're thinking about, you know, there's a question of, is it natural philosophy? I'm all interested in,
interested in your thoughts. I think that this ties into a conversation that we've had before,
me and Shiloh, about the differences between magic, myth, and mysticism. Okay. And the way that all three of
those things play in the mind, where it's like, I view magic as being something that is inherently,
there's a subterfuge there. There's someone who is the magician. Like, magic doesn't necessarily
just happen. Someone is doing magic. But on the other hand, myth appears to be something that does
just happen. It's something that's in the water. It's this cultural thing where by a communal decision,
we take some figure or some story to be incredibly valuable. Like Shiloh started doing this thing
where he will watch a movie and then he'll start to try to figure out which Greek myths it incorporates
most accurately. And I don't think there's been a single movie that we've watched where you haven't
been able to pin it to a set of really, really ancient stories. And it's weird because none of us
inherently walk around and are like, well, we believe in the Greek gods. And yet we're still
telling the same stories. And that doesn't seem magical. It seems mythical in the Joseph Campbell
sense where there's just some way of how we relate to the world that has been maintained over the
course of history. So with such fidelity, that something like a Greek myth can still be applicable
and something like the Catholic church can still be a good institution. Okay. So, and that's, that's like,
myth. It's, there's a powerful story. Magic feels like somebody's doing it. And mysticism feels like
someone is intentionally trying to delude you into thinking that something is that isn't.
That's interesting. On the, the characterization of myth is, I think, cool. I want to think about that.
For magic, I'm interested in what you think about the alleged phenomenon of synchronicity. So this is
the thing that Carl Jung talks about. You essentially have people experiencing surprising coincidences.
you both think to call each other at the same time, even though you haven't spoken to each other in
years. And then he has an explanation, you know, there's, there's a question of, can that be given
a physical, et cetera, explanation that strikes me as something that seems pretty magical rather than
mythical, but that there's not necessarily a caster.
Can I roll back and address something you said earlier? I do want to get to that. That's a,
that's interesting also. Yeah. Thank you. There's two things that you mentioned that I don't want to
slip by. One is the infinite regression of theories, right? The inability to terminate,
but I also wanted to point people, and I pointed this out on the podcast before, there's a fantastic paper.
I think it's called a hundred years of magic and physics is enough. And it's by a philosopher.
That's, that's not literally it. It's something close to it. I'll dig it up and put it in the
description. And he does this really cool analogy where he's like, look, relativity
is kind of like showing up to watch an illusionist on stage. And the illusionist is sawing a woman in
half and the relativists would aggregate all of the perspectives of the audience members ad infinitum,
right? So you would just basically take every perspective possible and create a mathematical
description of what it looked like to see this woman getting sawed in half. But the hidden reality
is that the woman is inside of a box and she puts her legs up and you can't see that. And so there's
this hidden actuality of what's physically occurring, but to assert that the conclusion
is that everybody sees a woman getting sawed in half. Therefore, the woman's getting sawed in half
is absurd because everybody knows that that's not naturally feasible. And so to tie this back to
the idea of what the hell do you do? Because at the end of the day, you're limited in your
observational capacity, right? You can only see so small. And I would say that the solution to that,
the ingenious solution to that is the hypothesis. And I would say that a hypothesis is basically
making an assumption that you ask the audience of your work to roll with. So you're like, let's assume
that there's atoms, right? But we're not going to split, we're not going to fight over it. We're just
going to assume that there's atoms in this presentation and that the atoms are these physical objects that
are going to act out all of the different behaviors that we're going to ascribe in explaining this given
phenomenon. So I think...
I do hate to cut your legs out from under you and know this as I say this, but do you remember
what last night we were talking about? Why is there stuff versus nothing? That's the gap in your
explanatory power is that even if you begin with atoms and you're like, the universe is made out of
atoms, which I think is a really good starting point and a very valuable one, you then get down
to the bottom of it and you're like, why the fuck are there atoms? And you don't... there's like,
there's no explanation for it. You just have to take it. And so...
Right, right. I just wrap it into the assumption of the hypothesis, essentially.
That's true, but...
And it's like, you could prove to me that there aren't atoms, right? You could tear apart my...
You could destroy my hypothesis. And so there's people in the academy are obsessed with hypothesis
testing, right? Because, okay, if you destroy my hypothesis, then my theory falls apart.
But I think that what Jeff is saying is, and if I understand this correctly,
is that each assumption that goes into a theory then demands its own mechanistic explanation.
If you assume that...
It's never... it's a never-ending process, right?
And so you get to a place in the process of explanation where even if atom is your fundamental
building block, then you're stuck at this place where you're like, well, why is there something
rather than nothing? And that is a place where it breaks. And you're like, well, there has to be
mechanism. But then you run into this philosophically intractable position where many, many people
before us have foundered, which is, how do you explain the birth of eternity and everything?
By the way, that paper is called 111 Years of Magic...
Pop-up.
It's bad.
Seven Years of Magic Are Enough. Let Us Return to Science Now by Dimitris Christopoulos.
There you go.
Excellent. We'll throw it in the description. It is a very good paper.
But so, like, there's a bunch of, there's a bunch of handles on this. Let's see if we can get
to a place where there's one that's easy to grab onto. Um, you, Shiloh, you, you were trying to pull
on a couple of different threads. One about the kind of magical interpretations of quantum physics
and these phenomena. Was that tied to a larger...
I think we were just started off playing with, like, what is a natural mechanism, right? And the
funny thing is, too, I don't know if it's time to bring this idea into the conversation, but
um, those mathematical descriptions that completely lack explanation whatsoever are perfectly valuable
for technological progress, right? You can make, you know, from your study with electricity, I'm
sure you could comment on that, but, you know, you have a few equations that describe how electric
circuits work. Like, you don't need to know a damn thing about the atoms or what they're actually,
what hidden processes they're doing to one another. You just need to understand how to parameterize
your system in such a way that you can figure it, you know, figure out how to make your machine work.
Okay, so is that a distinction between natural philosophy and science? Is that science is aimed
at parameterization that allows for eventual application? Maybe even without...
This is something that really drives me crazy is, like, we have institutions of science and technology,
but most people couldn't tell you the difference between the two if their life depended on it.
It's true. I met you guys through Clarice Cielo, who's the remnant scientist in quantum biology. You
guys will be talking to her soon. She and I have been talking to lots and lots of people who are really
passionate about science, but that when you dig, the thing that they're actually focusing on is technology
with sometimes incremental scientific advances. It's very science-themed, but many fewer people who are
interested in science in finding a new type of causal mechanism. So, yeah, I see people confusing science
and technology. But part of the reason, if we're trying to go at the nature of science, it's like,
how does science differ from natural philosophy and how does it differ from technology? There is a way that
science is or has been supposed to be in charge. It's like, when are you supposed to say yes? If
people are like, this is science, then you're supposed to agree and you're supposed to tell your friends
and so forth. And so, it's not surprising. Trust the science. Right. We saw that recently with the
pandemic. If an abstract concept like science is declared king, then it's not very surprising to see
a whole bunch of people try to get in on that. And so, technology will want to cast itself as science.
Lots of things will try to cast themselves as science. So, as you're saying this, I'm thinking back
to the question you asked about Plato, which is, okay, so Plato is looking at the human mind and making
these analogies to city-states. And I'm like, is it a treatise of political science then, in some sense?
Because it's being instrumentalized towards some practice in the world of either how to manage human
relationships or how to manage political relationships? Because that feels very technological at the end of the day.
It is. And in fact, what I was referring to is from The Republic, which is his most famous treatise
in political theory, essentially, or political philosophy or political science. Though you could
also see applications, like a lot of it involves a discussion of virtue and understanding. You might think,
well, I'd like to be a virtuous person. A bunch of Plato's dialogues pertain to this. And so, you could
look at the study of the mind or the study of human character as something that then could be a
technology. Like, it could be if we could figure out what's the formula behind virtue, then you could have
mechanism, maybe, you know, you have different pedagogical mechanisms, you can teach people,
and through different teaching methods, then you could cause people to be more virtuous. In my mind,
that's a technology.
Okay, so is there also some aspect of this that has to do with natural philosophy being a thing that
was practiced when the other side of the coin was like religious philosophy, where it's pointed
outwards inherently onto nature, like, not onto humans, which are clearly theologically separate
from nature. So you think that the study of the mind and the study of political forms
doesn't count as nature? And this was the question I was asking earlier, because on one hand, we're
part of nature, but on another hand, like you were saying, it seems like we're different.
I, this is actually really funny. I have a good friend who got a PhD in romantic poetry.
And I remember there was one point after we graduated where I was on the phone with her,
and I was trying to make this case about the fact that human society was structured along
fundamental biological principles. But like, if you were to look at bacteria and observe the principles
of multicellularity, like, this is what I studied, right? I studied bacterial multicellularity. So I'm like,
okay, look, you can see all of human society play out in the microbes.
Oh, that's fascinating. Huh.
And she was like, you can't do that. And I was like, what do you mean I can't do that?
And she's like, you can't, you can't just say that. Like, that's the thing that's not,
that's not sayable in- Why are you not allowed to say it?
Because in the humanities, you can't draw this bio-human argument. There is still,
even though it's not an explicit allegation or an implicit, an explicit rule, there's the implicit
idea that the weight of social movements that is behind saying that humans are like nature
is social Darwinism, is eugenics, is population control. It's all of these really other things.
And so we must somehow excise ourselves from nature and not draw those parallels.
I would also say it's a useful distinction if you're trying to, in certain contexts, right,
where you have, say, synthetic biological organisms that have been, so like anything
that has been made by a human, it's difficult to, it's less useful to consider that natural,
even though obviously human beings exist and we were, we're a product of nature. But if you're
trying to distinguish between stuff we made and stuff that everything else made,
then perhaps natural, artificial, or a good delineation.
Oh, that's fascinating because there's an interesting question, how much humans are their
own creation? And maybe this gets to your point about the, you know, if it, Darwinists or social
Darwinists tend to think about this as though this is like human doom in some way. It's like, well,
we came from nature, red in tooth and claw. Therefore, human society will be equally bad,
but humanity obviously has the ability to create itself to a certain degree. And so maybe, yeah,
maybe it's like the coins landed on its, on its edge with respect to, you know, human society created
by people. Maybe we think, um, as there's a question of, could it have been created differently?
I want to vote yes. Um, and then we didn't create most biological organisms, only the couple that,
you know, the synthetically made ones. Um, but then for ourselves, yeah, it's, it's what's even
crazier is like, how much can you, like, when I agree with you that we do seem to have a unique
propensity to create our own selves. But I also then start to wonder, like, to what lesser extent is
that a principle of nature in general? Like, to what extent do other organisms do the same thing,
but in a less obvious fashion, right? Like this, and this brings in that horrible, dirty word, will or,
desire or, or like directional movement across evolutionary time towards some form. Like,
Shiloh, we were talking last night about the evolution of species and consciousness and the,
the way that humans are kind of this weird eyeball onto the universe. Like, it's weird that the universe
made humans to then look back on itself. It's almost Narcissian in its, uh, in its construction,
that like the universe would create a mirror for itself. And then we were, we were kind of toying
with the idea of other beings evolving. I'm like, I look around and I'm, you know, there's trees and
ants and everybody else. And is it possible to have them take over the earth and have some kind of,
this sounds so crazy. We're just on a different planet or something. We're on a different planet,
but it's like, okay, what happens if ants are not somewhere down mid tier on the food chain,
but are actually the creatures that are biggest and strongest and smartest on a planet? Do they
eventually evolve to some kind of like insectoid super intelligence, the way that humans appear to
be evolving towards this kind of human super intelligence? Cause I'm like, you look at the way
that we train super intelligence now, and it's not like we're booting into it, the organizational
principles of brine shrimp and ants and forests and whales. We're like, read our work and despair
or whatever. And so I'm like, what would it look like to have a super intelligence that's ants-like?
I think it's possible. Ender's game.
Right. Yeah, exactly. And so I'm like, I just think that our sense of our super intelligence,
our, our creations, our, our, our prominence is deeply informed by the way that we interact with
the environment and with each other. And there are alternatives if your sensorium is different.
But I think that humans are kind of locked into a path that the only way out is through. Like,
I don't think you can go back in history and then hit play and then have World War II not happen.
Like, I think that World War II always happens. And I think that World War III might always happen
until everybody gets together and is like, okay, well, we need to have some kind of permanent
way of remembering this, that we shouldn't do this. And it's not a, I don't think that it's a,
it's, it's a branched path. I think that it's, it's folded in onto itself somehow.
That's interesting. If it's, if it's not a branched path, does that mean that we're not really choosing?
So that's the crazy thing. I think that you do choose, but you choose based off of all of the
inputs that you give, that you get at a given moment. And if all of the inputs are always,
if the inputs are the same each time, then you'll make the same choice each time.
I like the fat fist delineation between strategic and tactical free will on this subject, which is
like, you know, if you're a giraffe, like you're gonna eat some leaves that are probably at a certain
height or something, but you also get to choose which leaves to eat. And so there, there is like,
I have, you know, I don't have the free will to float out of my chair right now as much as I would
love to do that, but, um, I can choose how to move my body while I'm stuck to the chair.
So there there's, it's not a black and white issue necessarily.
No, but I think that this is tied back to this question of like, are humans natural or not?
And what are we, if we're not natural, what are we, if we're not natural?
Well, if everything that we do is synthetic, then it's hard to imagine. It's like,
then you come down to this like Cartesian thing of, of the Cartesian dualism of, you know,
where does the spirit reside in the body? If the spirit is immaterial and the body is material,
you're stuck with this interface problem. And so if everything that we make is synthetic
and we're not synthetic, then where does, where does synthetic emerge? Like, it's just, it's a,
I think it's an almost impossible line to draw. I don't necessarily think that the things that we make
are synthetic. I think that philosophically, it's almost impossible to say that what humans do
is synthetic and then say that humans are not synthetic. Cause I'm like, where does the synthetic
emerge?
I mean, maybe there's the question of what people really have a choice over. So I mean,
on one side there might be, we do everything exactly the same way on the other's hand,
maybe there's tactical free will. Um, and I like to think that at least humanity seems to have the
ability to make different choices about technology. You can see this in different societies. I've
visited Japan a few times and it's just fascinating that they just very simple example, they have bending
machines that give you hot drinks in a can. And that's just, whenever I'm there, why has this not
made it to the U S it's amazing. Um, but Japan also has high speed braille, uh, so they got the bullet
trains. Part of the reason they can do that is they have a different culture, different sort of way of
relating to the government. Um, if you imagine that all of the different cultures all naturally produce
different technology sets then, and we have some choice you have to suppose in the creation of the
different cultures, then maybe we have choices over which technologies we deploy and which ones we don't.
And that maybe, maybe that gives a way to anything that we can choose for ourselves or choose not to do
should count as self-created. Maybe, maybe put it like that. Okay. And that's really interested. Anything
that we can choose to do is self-created? Yeah. So you, you want a two-way power. You want it to be that
you can choose or you can choose not. If you, you know, you've got a, you can choose to flip the
switch, but something's moving your hand up, then you couldn't, you know, you want it to be that you
could choose yes and choose no. Okay. So to link this back to like, to put a handle on this, we were
talking about this question of natural philosophy versus science. And I posit that natural philosophy
that natural philosophy was, it was in context of religious philosophy as being the two main ways
that you could encounter the world. And one was about everything that was outside of human nature,
human kind, human behavior. And the other was very specifically about the divinity of man and our
relationship to God. And then what happens is as natural philosophy starts to transition into science,
you meld the religious aspect and the natural philosophical aspect together in some way.
Because the science is like you were saying earlier, a holistic worldview for how the world operates
and what can be done and what, what ought to be done. Because like consensus kind of operates that way.
But you think that I, I was surprised, I thought you were going to say that the religious philosophy
aspect got ejected. I mean, my, my experience with, so Cyan, you guys will undoubtedly have talked about this
in, you know, previous conversations, but you may be familiar with the idea of the multiverse,
where it's proposed that all of the different possibilities exist. And we're just here in,
you know, there's a million, then there we are number 227. And it'll be that there are way more than a
million. As, as far as I can tell, one of the reasons, I'm not saying this is the only reason,
but one of the reasons physicists have ended up with the multiverse picture is that they didn't want
to consider postulating something like a creator. And a creator could be, could be God, could be something
spiritual. It also could be an AI and we could be in a simulation. So, you know, it could go one way or
another, but the, I, I've noted, I've been in conversations with scientists where their thinking
seems to get confused when postulates come up that might have to interact with something outside the
human realm. And so it's, it's interesting that you propose that the religious philosophy got melded
in. I, I would have thought that it got pushed out. I think you can't push it out. I think that humans
have a deep and desperate need for gods, God or gods, whatever you want to say. And we need to have this
mythical framework. And with that mythical framework, if you remove the scaffold of an established tradition,
if you basically say, Hey, go ahead. I mean, just to like convince you, I want you to finish your
thought, but I just want to convince people that it does still persist deeply. And I think it's in
those magical. Leaps like the quantum mechanical superposition, or it's in the black hole,
or it's in the exotic, unimaginable dense material of the white dwarf, or it's in the impossible creation
of everything during the big bang. Like it, or, or, or particle, the God particle.
Well, yeah, the God equation, God particles, but also like, let's leave physics. What about biology?
You have this process, you have this force of, of Darwinian evolution. And it's funny because
you can literally read a biology paper. And if you just, every time they say evolution did this,
or evolution did that, you could just swap the word God in. And, you know, God has a rationale,
of course, in evolution, but it's still this hand of, of some const, some abstraction,
some abstract actor, right? I remember I got really into origin of life research at some point,
and I was reading the Woese paper that was the one that established the RNA pedigree for basically
being able to map their, their tree of life. And I swear to God, if I remember this correctly,
they called Darwin their patron saint, like explicitly.
It's, I've noticed, I've noticed that groups that this happens with, you know, atheists as well,
people, when they try to put all of the religious and spiritual stuff on the side, then it ends up
coming in, in terms of flavor. And then you worry that it seeps into the theories. I agree with that.
And so I think that that's what I'm saying. I'm not saying that it was explicitly mapped onto natural
philosophy in order to create some kind of unified discipline. What I'm saying is that we have this
really sticky need of a cosmic significance and value system. And whether that's the multiverse,
or that's black holes, or that's warped space time, or, or whatever, like all of these things are simply a
us turning away from the fact that we have discrete myths about what we should be doing,
and our place in the universe, our cosmology, and we have discrete stories about the rest of nature
that we're separate from, we suddenly were like, oh my God, we're not separate from the rest of nature,
we're not in a privileged position. All of this religious stuff probably isn't accurate,
and so we have to now find some new vessel to talk about it. And I think that that new vessel
fundamentally is science. And to bring it to the point that you were making about this moment of
choice, where you have, you have the ability to either choose to do something or not to do something.
I think that the reason that the institution of science is so ragged right now is that it offers
you no guidance as to which way you should choose. There's no moral valence attached to our central belief
system. Whereas like the mythological structure, yes, it has supernatural actions and so forth,
but I think, you know, from a Jungian perspective or something, there's a solid argument to be made
that if you're trying to, if you're approaching those things from a literalist scientific standpoint,
you're kind of missing the points, right? And so it's not clear that in the absence of a shared
mythological background upon which we all live our lives, that we're able to orient ourselves
towards what we want as a culture, as a society. And if it gets, and then it gets sucked up by science
or whoever's claiming to be the authority on the shoulds, right? And that's kind of a disaster.
And it's interesting also because, I mean, you see in science, like the things that the people will
say is that they're just pursuing truth for its own sake and they just are answering questions.
But interestingly, if you're just pursuing truth for its own sake, it's not clear that that gives
enough structure to the research. Like there's truths in every direction. You could research anything.
And so if, I mean, there's this question, you talked about the, you know, institution of science
being bragged right now. I completely agree. I think it's absolutely in crisis. There's a question
about why and it's multifaceted, but I think at least one part is the lack of well-designed,
principled research programs. I mean, the, you can think about like science wasn't always
housed primarily in academia. And before that, it was quite a different thing. Academia promises
academic freedom. People can go off in roughly whatever direction they'd like.
There's a really important question of whether that provides enough structure
for you to get sufficiently fast scientific progress or, or even to have the different
people talk to each other. I've, I've become worried that scientists are, we know things
are specialized, but I've started to become worried that they're becoming much, much more specialized
so that you won't even get enough people talking to each other. I mean, in my view,
if enough people aren't talking to each other, sharing observations and engaging in mutual checking
and correction, then you stop doing science and you revert to independent investigation. And this is
something that I'm, you know, that you want the, I guess, I think the Royal Society, sort of calling
back to the beginning of the conversation, like the Royal Society, wasn't the same thing as science,
but it was the house of science. It was like where science was set up. And so it's like science as an
institution can be sponsored or housed in different places. And then for it to really work, well, you have
to get the institution that's sponsoring it to line up with the institution of science itself.
I mean, I think you bring up a really good point about the social nature of science that
most people miss the points on as well. Like people are always, well, I wouldn't say always,
but you know, people will come to us and be like, I have this really cool theory. How the hell do I
publish it in nature? And it's like, well, you better start by embedding yourself in a society of
people who have published in nature and learn what it's like to form a community of people that can
mutually support the theory from their own investigative principles and so forth. And I think that in
general, there is this myth, and I believed in it too, until well into my late 20s, that if you had a
brilliant idea, that that was sufficient to make you the next Einstein or whatever it was, right?
I've been at this in like the 10 years since I've seen incredibly brilliant ideas put forth by people
who have made themselves persona non grata in scientific circles. And as a result of that,
I'm afraid that their ideas will never see the light of day and not never, but not in the same
efficient time, like those ideas will be rediscovered, they will play out. It's not clear those people will
get credit for having those ideas in the original form. But there is something like desperately political
and social about the institution of science that most people overlook and no one talks about when
you go to grad school. And it's a very real and powerful driver of what the science ends up saying.
And a lot of it has to do with, I mean, there's social structures, right? Like the peer review,
the people that sit at the journals, the editorial boards. But then there's also when I think about the
Royal Society, as far as I remember, wasn't it in some ways convened in order to show stuff to the
Royal family? Like, weren't they getting audiences from the Royal Society to like demonstrate things?
That's my understanding. My understanding is that they, from the Royal perspective, this was like a
thing you could show off. I think I'm thinking of the patron. I don't think I know for the Royal
Society in particular, but for the patron model, why do the patrons support science? Well, maybe you
care about science, but you can also show your friends cool things and you get to see cool things.
And so at least I think it holds generally there. And so I think that there's something that's really
important in that as well, which is that it's really, uh, fruitful when you have a crazed hobbyist
that cares about nothing else in the world except for this esoteric thing that they're studying.
And they're able to build interesting machines and, you know, make electrical current dance or sparks
fly. Like with the, with the experimentation on electricity, there's apocryphal stories of like,
one of the main guys who was involved in figuring out how electric current work. He was living
basically, uh, in, in, I think it was called like a chapter house where he was just supported by
public money. And he was recruiting all of the people that lived there to do these experiments.
They had some like little boy that they would suspend on silk strings to see if the chaff would stick
to them, if they could like trans transmit the electrical charge between, you know, charge,
like metallic objects suspended from the ceiling. And they were figuring out like,
can we use wool strings or do we need to use cotton or silk or?
Yeah, this is, um, it's, it's interesting. My, uh, researchers is, um, studying this era right now.
This is the Gray and Dufay era. And I was thinking of asking him before this call,
but did not get a chance about how Gray was funded. So, um, I, I seem to remember that he,
I can double check this, but I seem to remember that he lived, I can't remember if it was a chapter
house or something else, but it was basically, um, sinecured kind of academics. Like they weren't
really academics cause they weren't at the university, but those, it was like philosophers and experimenters
that were just like all living in this house, which seems a lot like the Silicon Valley model right
now, which is you have all of these houses of people getting together to just try to do stuff.
And so there's a sense that people are trying to bring this back, right? Because everybody recognizes
that, okay, the institution seemed to work really well at some point. That point was a really long time
ago. We went through all of this maturation, technological achievement. We've squeezed the
juice from the lemon. And now the question is, well, where do we go next? And it's unclear
that there's anywhere to go except for fucking around.
That's so the, the lemon here, I assume is academia or the existing establishment.
It's just like the existing paradigm. It could be like anything, like it could be like making cider,
but no, I think, I think this is completely right. The, and in terms of what to do, the thing I've been
sort of astonished by is that I think there are a lot of really either good hypotheses or big discoveries
that have already been made where my favorite example right now is Steven Wolfram. I don't know if
you've had a chance to talk to him, um, on your show, but, uh, you know, for, I mean, the book looks
intimidating, new kind of science. It's like this big tome. It's mostly pictures. The text is sort of
big. It's way shorter than it seems. Um, but I didn't have the opportunity to read it until just recently.
And I think that not to put too fine a point on it. Um, he's right that he's figured out something
really big. It has applications in physics and biology and possibly elsewhere. Um, it's essentially
a new paradigm. Should everyone, you know, should everyone join? No. And has he figured out everything
in physics yet? No, but that doesn't stop it from having a whole lot of value. And the thing I find
so amazing about his case is that he just crushes it on credentials. You know, he's publishing physics
papers when he's 17 and super early PhD and goes to the Institute for advanced study and et cetera,
et cetera. He ends up, you know, funding his thing through Mathematica, which is the software that he
created. Notably now, a lot of people, when they do physics using math software, they're using the
software that he wrote. And so you would think, and then he comes out with this big announcement.
It's like, okay, figured something out. You would expect there to be at least really serious review
and, you know, attempts at, you know, separating what's good from what's bad and then uptake of the
good. As far as I can tell, very, very little of that has happened. And so, but it's not, it's not just
Wolfram. I mean, you know, you'll talk to Clarice Yalo. I think she has an amazing research project in
quantum biology and that that's not praise that I give lightly. I care a lot about research project
design. And, but she's got a very good hypothesis. And if it's, it's good in the sense that it's
not accepted currently by the mainstream scientific establishment, it is very well supported by the
evidence. And if it's true, it has all sorts of impacts for how we should think about in particular
quantum physics and biology, but that's another one. I think there are all of these ideas. Actually,
I just ran a workshop on revolutionary science and got a bunch of these people together. There
are ideas and they're just not being aggressively picked up. They're not even slowly being picked up
by the existing institutions. So, I mean, yeah, I think that paradigm shifts are really painful.
I think that goes underspoken. Like, and I think that there's an analogy for this in all of our own
personal lives, which is that generally speaking, I think that we start off as little kids with
basically no idea of how to get along with other people. We're certainly not masterpieces. And then
ideally you go through all of these crises throughout your life, right? Where you're like,
you know, and it might be, it's different for everybody. You go through these traumas,
right? Maybe it's getting dumped by your first girlfriend. Maybe it's a psychedelic experience,
but you start to like kind of reconsider yourself at various points where you're like,
damn, maybe I am kind of an asshole or whatever it is. Like it could be,
you know, and honestly, I, at this point kind of recognize these on a daily basis to some extent,
to the extent that I'm hopefully growing as a human being, but it's painful to go through that
realization, right? You almost need to break first. And so with paradigms, I feel like the old paradigm
has to really break in this painful way before anybody who's inside of that paradigm has any
interest in stepping outside of it. And so if the people inside of say, Wolfram's peer group
think that they're getting by just fine on their old paradigm, then they have very little incentive
to re-examine themselves, right? And so that's why I think with a human being, it takes like a
psychedelic experience or it takes, you know, some tragedy often for, and it could be a minor tragedy
on a daily basis, you know, it takes something to really shake you up and really make you reconsider
the belief structure that you have.
And I would add one other piece to that, which is that you also have to have something to turn to
that feels as satisfying as the thing that you're giving up. And the thing that we're giving, like,
if we're talking about science as an institution, I like your analogy about the human transition,
right? You have this like really crazy psychedelic trip. You wake up from it different.
theoretically, you wake up from it different because you saw something while you were on
your trip that you were like, this is the structure that I'm going to use to replace
the structure that I have right now. It's not like you were...
Well, this is why a lot of people hate weed, I think, honestly, because they're like,
ah, it makes me paranoid. I'm like, yeah, it's supposed to, like, you're actually supposed
to reconsider your situation. And that might not be good for like certain people who are already
at a breaking point.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, definitely. I always think of that Curb Your Enthusiasm episode where Larry smokes weed for
the first time and he just goes into the bathroom and he like, for the first time,
recognizes what an asshole he is and he can't really deal with it. But so yeah, like the rationalists
always talk about this idea that there are these pillars to somebody's worldview and you have to not,
you have to be able to let these pillars go and you're confronted by other knowledge. And I'm like,
yeah, that's not quite the full story. I think that the full story is that you have to
have a sufficiently well-constructed house that you live in that you can take a couple of the poles out
without the entire thing falling down on your head.
And so with an institution like science, I think that you have a house that is relatively wobbly in
the sense that there's like a single central pole that holds the whole thing up. And if you walk in
and you're like, we got to take that thing out, the people that are in the house are like, well,
what the fuck? Like, that's the only pole that we have. The roof's going to fall down. And so if you're
like, well, we're going to jack it up and we're going to replace it with these other ones. And then this
is how the roof stays up. Then I think people are more amenable to it. But without that, I think it's
just, you're asking people to embrace full chaos. And understandably, I listened to a lot of Joe
Rogan. I hear what stuff people are saying about scientists and academics in that sphere. And I'm
like, you guys are like almost right. But I can see the seething discontent at the gates that the
academics are like, we have to nip this in the bud.
Well, there's and then this is where because I'm trying to imagine what does a psychedelic experience
for academia look like or something and the but there's there's this other problem, which is that
So I was just at a conference, I guess, last last week, and the week before anyway, somebody on stage
cited the statistic drawn from a published paper that I think it was 85% of research funds are wasted.
Now, that's, that's, first of all, that's a crazy idea. But let's suppose that it's even if it's just
half the one of the things that I think is so challenging about imagining the current system
reforming itself is that when you you're talking, I think you're totally right that reform and change
are much easier when there is a new structure to transition to, you don't need to reinvent the
entire universe from scratch, you need to reinvent this one, you don't have to rebuild your house
from the ground up, you have to re rebuild one room. But the, it's hard to figure out what you have,
if you have so we also had this analogy earlier of institutions as people. And so maybe they have
similar life cycles. And so if you think about the institutions currently housing science as having
become rigid, you think of the institution as having become bloated in some way, then it's,
it's hard to figure out what do you what do you transition to, right, whatever you're going to
transition to it's, it's, you know, if it's 85% is wasted, do you transition to something that that
cuts that or doesn't? Well, I mean, I think that it's hard to argue that 85% of funds given by patrons
to the loopy experimenters weren't wasted. Like, you give somebody funds, and they do a bunch of weird
ass experiments that are poorly controlled. That's a fair point. That's a fair point. I like that.
And so I'm like, oh, go ahead. Can we, can we, I don't know, we don't have to deal with this right
now. But that science in the day of the Royal Academy was not done by people who were career
scientists. If they were anything approximating that, like they might have spent a lot of their
time on science, but they were independently wealthy. And so this, this post-war peer review
system is pretty new, right? This is definitely true. Interestingly, there are some people who are
career scientists. If you look at Hawksby from, he's the 1706 guy who isolates electric light,
electricity as a source of light. He worked for the Royal Society as an experimenter.
Yeah. Though I guess his, his main profession was instrument sort of manufacturer. That's still
pretty close. But you're, you're completely right that after, and this is, this is part of this. If
you look at the graph of number of PhDs produced in the US, it, you know, goes up dramatically from 1900 to
2000, it's like, you know, 100 X or some very large multiple. And so, yeah, we have a new system.
And I mean, I guess the conclusion of this is just really simple. You just need to,
just need to design new system for the thing to move over to so that it's easier for the existing
system to transition. Yeah. Let's play with what that looks like maybe.
So something that we've come across before is, do you know the work of Michael Levin?
Uh, yeah. A little bit, a little bit, a little bit.
And like in broad strokes, Michael Levin's idea is that going down into each individual cell and trying
to tweak molecular switches is probably not going to be the way that we're able to make large scale
reconstructions of tissue behavior. Like you won't be able to regrow a limb by going in and tweaking
each and every single little lever. His philosophy is that you have to figure out what are the conditions
in which the cells want to make a new limb. And if you can change those conditions, then you get the limb.
And I'm like, go ahead. I was just going to say, I, I, I haven't looked at his work closely yet.
I did read the body electric. I don't know if you've come across this book. Um, it was recently
recommended to us. Yeah. Yeah. We have not read it yet. I mean, I'm sort of on a hunt for all of the
explanatory principles that are missing in biology. Like we have this sort of substantial, surprising
complexity in biology. You know, it was just marveling about how, you know, you, you feed a cat,
cat food. Um, it's a true for animals in general, you feed them fairly simple things. They produce
other animals. Like that's, this is a completely shocking thing. We don't have computers that you
give electricity to, and they produce other computers. It's like, that's completely amazing.
Um, and if you look at how people normally explain things biologically, you have chemical explanations,
mechanical explanations, DNA is sometimes analogized to code. But when you, when you go in and look,
it's still, we still don't really understand how a lot of the things work. And my thought as a theorist,
I'm like, okay, there are missing explanatory principles here. That's why quantum biology says weak
magnetic fields interacting with quantum effects. The bioelectricity is another interesting one. Um,
the Wolfram stuff actually ends up being another possible way to explain some things in biology. But yeah,
I, I, um, I just wanted to, to mention the body electric, which is the, I think the main
book people go to when they're starting to think about bioelectricity.
Yeah. We, I think the podcast we just put out last week, I think about a week ago was with a
biochemist, uh, Michael Hughes. It's a long time front of the show. And he was also trying to reveal
interesting unseen ways in which water participates electrically in various information channels
within cells. And that there's, there is, there are imaginable circuits, um, let's say dark matter
of biology places where we kind of put these placeholders in like, oh yeah, there's pH things
that matter. Like, don't worry about it. Um, and then you're like, wait a second, why does pH matter?
And you start to really push on these things and start to arrive at these electrical processes
and really come up with a different, a wholly different approach to understanding how the
proteins do what they actually do. Uh, and I think Michael actually mentioned the body electric,
maybe if not in that podcast somewhere else, I'm pretty sure that it came up during
patron chat too. Gilbert Lang too. But yeah, that's something we've been meaning to get into
for sure. Pardon the interruption. I just need to remind you that this program is entirely paid for
by listeners over at our patron page, patreon.com slash demystify sigh, where you can join our inner
crew and hang out with us once a week. Tell us what you think, help us get oriented towards the most
interesting problems in the world. And you can just sleep better knowing that you are making sure
that this program happens without us having any advertisements or sponsors. I'll see you there,
patreon.com slash demystify sigh. The way that I see it is that there's two questions here. One is,
can things go differently if you were to recreate initial conditions? And the other is, how do you
go about recreating newly functional conditions after something is broken down? It's like, can you
actually regenerate? And I just, I don't know, I kind of want to leave that general. I think that I have
a bunch of ideas for how it maps into stuff. But I kind of want to hear what you guys think before
I drop my map.
I mean, that's a huge question. Like, just science or societies? I mean, when we were talking to Ben
Landau-Taylor, we had a similar thread that we were pursuing throughout the conversation, which was
once a civilization has crossed its golden age, is there a path back? And I don't know that we
actually got an answer to that question. Well, I'm like, I think that you can look at any biological
system in general and ask that same question, right? Like there's a relatively narrow
fraction of species that can regenerate themselves. There's some like jellyfish that can return to a
polyp state and then play out the entire arc again. And I'm like, is that just some kind of-
Oh, those trees, those seeds that they found recently, that was crazy.
Oh yeah. They found like a bunch of seeds from Siberian permafrost from 30,000 years ago and
they planted them and they germinated and they grew a plant.
I can't believe it. I can't believe it.
It'd be really funny if it was just weeds seeds, like some weeds that somebody had in their yard and
then just like slipped them into the- Yeah.
It'll turn out that somebody has some like, you know, nascent science institutions in the freezer and
we just have to thaw them out and then we can plant them and then, you know, they've been around since
Plato's time or something that would- Okay. Well, I think that that's one possible mechanism, right?
Like spores. Like if we extend the metaphor of biological organization to both human and psychological
principles, then spores are a vessel by which things weather long stretches of adverse conditions.
I think that's right. I think a disanalogy or a reason I'd look for a different analogy than spores
is that with biological things, they have all the information somewhere inside them. At least,
I'm actually not even sure that's true. They have a lot of information that they start off with
inside them. I think that if you- And so, I would trust Ben and Samo's understanding of the history of
revitalizing institutions more than my own. I like to think- I'm learning about the history of those things,
but I'm trying to sort of think about institutions as such. A lot of the materials that you would want to
build a functional scientific apparatus are materials that have existed at a certain point. So let me give an
example. So usually when people are- So controversial viewpoint, I think that it's
pretty likely that more STEM education will actually decrease the quality of science.
Now, this is surprising, right? Because you'd think the more you educate people in science and
technology, engineering, mathematics, etc., the better science you'll get.
But usually, STEM trades off against the humanities. And as far as I've been able to tell, the two ways
that anyone understands science is through the history of science or through the philosophy of science.
You can get some experience with it directly, but there's always a question of, are you really doing
science or are you doing something that is called science that is adjacent? But if you want to,
you know, be sure you're looking at bona fide science, looking at the history is a great place.
But if you're looking at the history or philosophy of science, then you're looking at the humanities.
I've thought about the- but then, you know, do we need new histories of science? Actually,
I do think yes. And do we need new philosophy of science? I also think yes.
But there's lots of good stuff that already exists. And so, I would think that one of the
big activities of trying to cause revitalization for any human institution is to learn as much as you
can about the relevant topic from- it's like, if you imagine, you know, in picturesque terms,
the civilization is declining. And then we have these huge aqueducts that we no longer know how to build.
And we hear stories of, you know, the ancients who could do all these things that we can't do.
Absolutely, you should study them. And you should also try to think on your own. But yeah, I think in the
context of declining institutions, there's tons that can be learned from how those institutions used to behave.
So, what is your vision of science 2.0?
Well, so I'm realizing, I've been getting closer to this over time, but I do think this conversation is
causing me to realize that just a full new view needs to be articulated. And so, I'm not going to
be able to say an entire- it's disappointing. I'm not going to be able to say an entire one
on the spot, but I can take a stab at it. Yeah, let's hear it.
Yeah, I'm right there with you, man. Like, we've- this is something we think about all the time,
and there are some sea of- there's a sea of possibilities, but I'm not sure which one is
the proper way forward. Yeah. So, the first thing that I would note is that-
So, I do have to think about the point from earlier, which is, you know, it's the 85% of
scientific funding's wasted, but lots of scientific funding's supposed to be wasted. Okay, I do need to
think about that. It's a good point. I still think it's going to turn out that
that the operation of most science is going to be much less expensive than people think.
I don't know that that's going to be true absolutely entirely across the board,
but I'm a big believer in the exceptional performance of certain individuals and groups.
It's like, if you can figure out who are the absolute top people and you can fund those people
and those people's research projects, then I think that's going to end up doing a lot.
This is one of the reasons I'm working with Clarice, as far as I can tell. She's one of these people,
you know, and then here, the thing that I think is necessary. So, here I'm,
you know, sort of in whatever, reserve the right to backtrack, I'm inventing here.
I actually think the thing from earlier about how scientists in academia are sort of pursuing their
interests, all truth is valuable, you can go in any direction. I actually think that having
well-designed research projects is very, very important for driving science forward.
The, that maybe just sounds totally obvious, but it is really different than the wisdom I
frequently hear, which is just hire the, you know, smartest people and then get out of their way
and let them do whatever they want. The sort of thing. I mean, so for example, I'm thinking about
whether my organization should host a conference next year on complexity and biology. This is because
as far as I can tell, it's the
biggest remaining visible central mystery. Like it used to be, where did the universe come from,
etc. And I agree, we don't have an answer yet to why is there something rather than nothing.
But I don't know, we've been looking at particles for a long time and dark matter and string theory.
Like people have been doing that for a while. The, we do just have biology, biology is amazing.
The complex, and then there's this question, you know, do we actually have a good explanation for
the complexity that we see in biology? There's a standard explanation. We mentioned, you know,
Darwin and natural selection, you know, you guys proposed that natural selection sort of may be a
stand in for God. You see it doing all sorts of things. One of the cool things that seems to come
out of Wolfram's research is that the optimization power of natural selection is actually not as high
as people think. There's, there's, if you imagine there's like some number of generations, there's
certain types of constraints we can run simulations. And so if it turns out that natural selection
is a weakly optimizing force rather than a strongly optimizing one, then there's this really
interesting question, okay, well, where does all the weird complexity come from? Wolfram's got an answer,
you know, the intelligent design people have an answer. The, I'm toying around with ways that maybe,
you know, the weird laws of quantum physics could help to explain some of those things. The
I think that you want basically, and this is sort of, okay, applying sort of the Kuhnian idea,
but trying to do it deliberately. If you have a paradigm, if the paradigm is sort of running dry,
there's tons of people doing normal science, but we're not getting as much in the way of results.
Then the thing you want to do is you want to identify the anomalies.
The anomalies are going to be the things that are the most solidly verified, least compatible things
with the least compatible with the existing system. So with quantum biology, weak magnetic fields are,
weak magnetic field effects are the thing. You know, you'll get to talk to Clarice about this,
but essentially there are all these cases in biology where very weak magnetic fields
have effects. And the only known explanation that can actually work for this
is a quantum one. Scientists haven't wanted to go the quantum direction. I think that's for a bunch
of social reasons. And so I think, cool, anomaly. You got weak, people will grant birds navigate using
the Earth's magnetic field. That's a weak magnetic field. How does it work? No answers given. I'm like,
ah, anomaly. Okay, cool. We've got one. I think the complexity in biology is another anomaly. I think
there are actually a whole bunch of these. The one that people get really weird when you talk about
it for some reason is consciousness. I do think consciousness is real. I'm conscious, you guys are
conscious, etc. But you mentioned consciousness in some circles and everybody becomes upset.
In the sense that they don't think that consciousness is a thing? Because I've heard of a lot of people
be like, humans are the only ones that are conscious. I've heard a lot of crazy takes on what defines it,
but I've never heard anybody get upset about the nature of consciousness being a parent.
No, no. I've encountered it in a bunch of different cases. The reason I think that it's upsetting to some
people is that prima facie, you mentioned Descartes' dualism. Prima facie, it's hard to mesh the idea of
consciousness with the physical world. Descartes gave this really simple argument. You can imagine
the physical world existing without consciousness. You can also imagine consciousness existing without
the physical world. It's like the matrix, except no matrix. There's just no physical world. It's just
your mind. And he proposes if you can conceive of things existing, you know, A existing without B and B
existing without A, then they're distinct. Roughly, that's the argument. That argument gets repeated
later, like David Chalmers, one of the sort of top philosophers of mind and, you know,
analytic philosophy now. He gives an argument which is similar to this. And that's vexing.
Like, in fact, my own journey and thinking about all these things, I used to have a
it's all particles view of the world. Then I got to thinking about consciousness. I was like,
uh-oh. It's like there's this completely beautiful picture of the world with these mathematical
equations, and it all works out nicely. And then there's this little string sticking out. And you're
like, what's that? And people are, well, maybe you pull on it and figure out that your beautiful picture
needs to change. A bunch of people want to say, no, no, that's not a thing, or it's not special.
I think it's an anomaly. I think there are a bunch of these anomalies.
Not all anomalies are fruitful or easy to investigate. I think we could probably come up
with a bunch of anomalies that are pretty hard to get information out of. The thing you really want,
and I'm sort of talking about research program design as I see it, the thing you really want is
you want a very tightly constrained evidential circumstance. You want it to be that you're
seeing something that you're pretty sure doesn't make sense. There are some things where there could,
so it's like, you know, if, and I haven't looked at it, I'm just learning about particle physics now,
but it's like if the Higgs boson is larger than we think, well, I don't know. We didn't really know
why the particles were supposed to be the sizes they are. There's tons of options. The really sort of
you want to look at quasi paradoxes. You want to look at places where there's something that really
doesn't seem to fit, given everything else you know, because that shows you that you're wrong
about something. If you're like, this shouldn't be possible, given my assumptions, and it's possible,
it follows that some of your assumptions are wrong, and so that indicates tractability. So I guess the
thing I do is specify how the money gets raised. You've got ideas there, but then you identify
well-designed research programs that go after the major anomalies, and it's okay if they all disagree
with each other, that's actually fine. And then, while I'm speculating here, you create a research
center that gives each of the different people their own area, but has them have lunch together,
roughly, so that then you get crosstalk between all the different research programs.
Yeah, and probably some other stuff, but let's start there.
How do you protect against paradigm repair programs? So we see, you know, ample examples
of anomalous findings. You know, let's pick on the galactic rotation problem, for example, right?
And the, you know, this could be seen as a refutation of the gravitational dominance in the galaxy.
However, the popular approach that's emerged in the last few decades is to create a magical substance
called dark matter, and then we can keep the gravitational paradigm for the galaxy together.
And, you know, if we just build nice enough detectors, we'll eventually find this stuff,
right? So, and that's a really, like, bright example that's glaring, but this is a, this is a
generalizable principle, I think, which is that, yeah, the age of the universe is another one,
right? They launched the James Webb satellite. There's all sorts of contradictions of the standard
Big Bang explanation. And instead of being like, wait a second, maybe this Big Bang thing isn't
actually the best way to go here. They're like, well, let's just, you know, we can just do some
stitching and, you know, give it a little tummy tuck. And also like the structure of stars and the
evolution of stars. It's very common. It's very, it's just like, there's constantly paradigms that
we've invented, that are maybe what, 50 to 100 years old, that we're big fans of. And all of your,
like, great thing, you know, if you're selecting for great thinkers, or I forget what you called them,
but like the sort of cream of the crop thinkers, they're going to have come up inside of those
paradigms, right? And identifying, and unfortunately, identifying the people working outside of those
paradigms, those are usually the crazy people in their garages or something, right? Or the guy at
the patent office or whatever it is. Yeah, no, this is, well, this, this is, this is great. I, well,
so a couple thoughts. So, okay. Thought, thought number one, the repair of paradigms,
it's really important to understand that this is both natural and frequently good. It just, it's the,
uh, the actual evidential landscape, the data, um, is noisy. And so if you require perfect fit
between the theory and the raw data, that's not going to happen in almost any case. So you,
even when the theory is correct, you should just expect that there's going to be what looks like
hand waving and so forth. So you can't, there, there is such a thing as bad hand waving. Um,
but we can't ban all of it. It's just people, the, we need to be able to, uh,
the, the thing you want to do, go ahead. I think that we need to be comfortable with
the idea that you can come up with a theory that works pretty well in most cases and recognize that
the way that the universe unfolds is inherently chaotic and complicated. So you will always find
exceptions, even to a paradigm that seems to hold most of the time. And I think that our searches
for functional paradigms have to be looked at through that lens. We're not finding the final
molds that we hammer everything into.
Yeah. Model is a good synonym for theory, don't you think? And so if you're building like a scale
model of a B-52, like you could be like, well, that model sucks because the bombs don't explode.
It's like, I guess, but it still does look a lot like a B-52. And there's a lot of useful features
of that model at the same time. Right? Yeah. I just, I think that the, the thing that we have to
figure out is when somebody is trying to pull the wool over your eyes versus when somebody is like,
look, it works in all of these cases and there's some that it doesn't, which means that there must
be something else that's happening. And then gives that person grounds to go explore that right now.
What we have, or you called it paradigm repair. Yeah. I did a rehab or something like that.
I don't know. I just threw that out there. I don't think that's not a term I got from anybody or anything.
Oh, no, no, no. I just, I like, I like the, the, the adding up the cycles.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, exactly.
By the way. Yeah. That was a really, really productive model, right? It really does recall
the phenomenon very, very precisely. And I think that the way that we can figure out hand
waving versus this paradigm repairs when somebody is like, the fact that it doesn't fit doesn't matter
or is irrelevant versus somebody being like, well, the fact that it doesn't fit
might be representative of something else. But the thing that I'm trying to make the case for still
holds. I'm so I have, I have a, a different sort of proposal. The thing that I worry about just with
tests, like the one you're suggesting is that if those get institutionalized, they're very,
very easy for people to game people can, you know, if, if they learn that, you know, saying,
you know, there are no exceptions is not the way to get funded. If the thing they need to say is,
well, look, there's all those exceptions, that's fine, but it works in these cases. I think, I think the
thing we want is, I do think that people falsifying data is very bad. And there are a bunch of different
ways I've been thinking about how one can go about essentially catching people that do that sort of
thing. But on the sort of constructive side, the thing I've actually been thinking about is whether
there's, rather than stopping the people from saving the appearances within their own paradigm,
figuring out how to get competing paradigms identified and advanced. The problem that ends up
happening in a bunch of cases is that the reigning paradigm gets a lot of funding. So it gets a lot of
ability to repair itself. The competing paradigm, it is some guy in their garage. And the, and then
they frequently don't end up having the resources to actually turn it into a real competitor. There is
the challenge of how do you pick out the, you know, promising people from the crazy people, but let's
bracket that one for a second. If you assume that you actually have picked out the promising people,
then, and I'm, I still don't know if this works. So I'm actively thinking about this and want to do
this if I can. Um, I'd love to pit paradigms against each other where they get some amount of resources
to be able to each develop, but then either the people inside the paradigms or the, whoever's running
the whole thing works hard to identify crucial experiments that could conceivably decide between
them. And so it's like each side gets the opportunity to build up and you identify the
crucial experiment. And then that helps to show whether one or the other ends up working. And you
could imagine like a scientist doing this in their own mind. They like have different competing
hypotheses. They do experiments, but it's hard for like scientists need to spend a lot of time
thinking about particular hypotheses. It's hard to build out the other side. I actually have,
go ahead. I'll, I'll give an example that I've got an example. I've been thinking about that.
Yeah, go ahead. I was going to give examples upon examples as well.
Well, there is a fracture point too. There is, there is a fracture point. I want to hear your
example though, because there's, there's an issue with that too, that I can see.
Okay. Yeah. So obviously love more ideas on how to make these things work.
Um, the one I've been most interested in, uh, mostly because I've been spending so much time
thinking about quantum biology, um, is quantum biology and nanotechnology where,
so there's this famous Feynman lecture entitled, there's plenty of room at the bottom where he talks
about this vision of, well, maybe if you got your manufacturing really good, you could make extremely
small machines, all those nano machines, maybe you could make nano machines that can make nano machines.
And then this vision was advanced by Eric Drexler in particular. And so then you have a whole bunch
of people who think that this is a good idea and could work. And the thing we have to do is figure out
not just IBM, spelling out IBM with little atoms, but figure out how to make little robots,
essentially that can manufacture other things and et cetera. The, so that's, that's nanotechnology.
The reason I've been thinking about that in the context of quantum biology is that as far as I can tell,
the nanotechnology sort of approach assumes that, and this is from what I've seen so far,
it looks like it needs the quantum element to factor out at a certain point. So we believe
that the quantum element factors out by the time you get to large objects like human-sized objects.
We don't walk around seeing superpositions or if we do, we don't know that that's what's happening.
Um, the, and then I was glancing through a nanotechnology book and looked at the number of
mentions of quantum dynamics and it was very like one mention or something like that. Now,
I think that the semiconductor industry has to deal with deviations from classical predictions
all the time. As they get down and build the tiny, tiny little circuits,
they end up finding that the materials don't behave the way you would expect on the classical view.
And that's because the quantum view is the quantum thing and that's what's happening.
But so then if you essentially, if you imagine that as you zoom in, as you go down,
you eventually start to hit quantum distortions.
There's a question about whether the quantum distortions kick in at a high enough level or
strongly enough that it makes it actually really hard to build your nano machines. We can easily
imagine a world where it's not a problem. You know, quantum effects kick in at the nanometer level
and you know, not higher and they factor out pretty cleanly. So don't, you know, have things dip below
that. You can also imagine one where quantum effects start to come in at the 40 nanometer level
and that they become more and more intense such that in reality, you try to build your little nanobot
and the nanobots going to have a bad time. This is an example where this is thinking about
quantum biology and the expectations of the nanotechnology area. I currently think there
is actually a conflict here and that this could actually be resolved. And so this is the sort of
thing I'm imagining where you have different approaches and then you get some different crucial
experiments. And then, you know, it doesn't, you know, if you could, there's going to be an argument
the other way, which is if you can build the nano machines, then then, you know, then it's really
hard to get relevant quantum effects that end up impacting biology in different ways. I'm not sure
yet that that works, but it might. And then the idea of having those pit against one another and with
these crucial experiments, I think is just at least a very cool idea. What are the paradigms that are pitted
against one another? I was going to ask the exact same question. You said what other ones?
No, like in this example. Yeah, because we were talking about pitting paradigms against one another.
Yeah. Yeah. So the, um, it's a, uh, it's a certain type of classical chemistry paradigm versus the
Clarice quantum biology paradigm. The classical chemistry paradigm has various assumptions about
how you should be able to build nano machines and the quantum biology paradigm thinks it's much less
likely. And so, and, and I wonder, I'm not, is there an approach? Is the quantum people have
an approach to building these nanobots? It sounds like they might just be saying that things get so
weird and fuzzy down at a certain scale that it's not manipulable in the same transparently
straightforward way. There, there's a, there's like a totally coin on edge wishy-washy world we could
imagine where there are substantial quantum effects, but we can engineer around them, but it's really
hard to engineer around them, but we still can. And then, and then you can go to either side of that.
It could be that, nope, you can't. And we're not gonna be able to build nano machines. Or you could
imagine something that's like less extreme, which is sure you could build nano machines, but you have
to imitate biology really closely because biology is actually made of nano machines in a bunch of ways.
And so there is something special that biology has figured out how to do with quantum and you have
to do that as opposed to treating it like a computer or something like that. Yeah, that's right.
That's right. I see. I see. I see. I mean, one of the things that I thought about earlier when you
were talking about pitting paradigms against one another is that unfortunately, I think history will
reveal and it might be more obvious a thousand years from now than right now. But I think that history
reveals that we do adopt, uh, the lesser, like paradigms do get pitted against one another,
but oftentimes the one that wins out only wins out because its opponent is unable to answer some
critical question, which is put in front of it. Like, uh, there's a number of these I can point
to that are kind of unfolding right now in the astrophysic. I mean, I like I work in the astrophysical
space. So that's kind of what comes to my mind, but you know, there's, uh, the famous, uh,
Wegner-Carrie debate, which is like why the, how the continents moved apart over time. Um,
and you know, another one would be, which hold on to make that explicit.
Wegner is a continental drift that they were once part of Pangea and then they moved apart. Sam
Warren-Carrie is a expansionist where he says that the earth is smaller and then expands in order to
move the continents apart, which explains why the seafloors are only 200 million years old and like
all these other things. Yeah. Let's just stick with that. Let's not even bring more examples.
Yeah. The problem with the, with Cary's theory is that to this day, no one's been able to figure
out where the extra mass for expansion would come from. Like there's no motive. Like if you're like,
okay, fine. Expansion addresses all of these things. There's a lot like there's, uh, there's missing
pieces of the prehistoric plate. Like there's this ancient ocean called the Tethys Sea that nobody
can find. And they're like, Oh, it's been subducted. That's why it's gone. It's even worse though,
because the reason I think that, uh, Cary's idea, uh, well, Cary didn't have a mechanism,
like Nastia said for the expansion, but, uh, Wegner actually was kind of a fringe scientist
since day. I don't know that he lived to see his continental drift thing be accepted, but anyways,
it was accepted. And the reason it was accepted is because somebody couldn't tell you who proposed
that there was these conveyor belts of magna magma under the, uh, under the, the, the crust,
which provided, um, the motive power. They mapped the sea floor and they found these spreading ridges
and they were like, it's like a convection cell. Problem is that all attempts to locate these
convection cells in the locations where they're supposed to be. Yeah. They're not there. And in fact,
I mean, I could just spend the whole rest of this podcast telling you examples like this where it's
like, I think that maybe, uh, Cary didn't have the full idea and he didn't really understand what's
happening, but he seems to have perhaps been on to something kind of interesting that never got
developed. And I can just point to example, example, you know, there's tons of these and it's,
it would just take too much time for me to go into each one of these, but where somebody didn't
have the fully right idea, but some other paradigm that seems to have been even less successful has
become the dominant one. And so there's these, these, these, uh, paradigm wars that do happen
and the winner by consensus does emerge, but oh, you know, well, I've, I've, I've got some thoughts
about, so this is great examples though. This is helping to put, you know, help forcing me to make,
you know, revise and make my ideas better proposals better. The, um, so I've been thinking about,
uh, so the first thought is that you don't want to have the winning paradigm, so to speak. You don't
want that to be judged on, uh, something like an absolute standard of correctness or with respect
to final physics. We don't, we don't know necessarily what that's going to be. We would,
we have rejected Newton because, you know, he had gravity without having a mechanism. The answer is
no, we want to have accepted Newton at the time. So there, I do think there is going to be a crucial
question of how you decide the things. The way I've been thinking about it has actually been
to, and this, this may not end up generalizing to cover all the areas. I do think the, um,
continental drift, uh, areas is a super good one for me to learn about and think about,
but I've been thinking about tying it to existing technological research programs where, so like,
one of the examples that I think is really interesting is AI. You know, there are a bunch
of people who've gotten a lot of news over the last couple of years thinking that AI is going to
destroy the world. Um, I happen to think that it's not correct. It's not going to, um,
but I've been spending a bunch of time trying to understand how exactly that sort of viewpoint or
paradigm came about. Also, if you look at the AI companies, there's actually a really large amount
of money that's being spent on, you could call it a particular viewpoint or paradigm around the idea
of intelligence. It's like, there's all of these assumptions about we're going to get artificial
general intelligence. There's assumptions about how human intelligence works, about how that's going to
be replicated. I think that if you, I'm not totally sure, but my, my intuition or my, my hunch is that
if you start with areas in technology that people are trying to develop and you reverse engineer from
those or trace those back to the paradigms, then you're going to find things that there are actually
already people currently invested in where there's going to be some practical outcome that can be tied
to some sort of difference of scientific hypothesis. And if that ends up being true, then the thing you're
checking is something like the near term prospects for the paradigm as believed by the people who are
advancing the technology. And then conceivably, if you can, you know, you could save a whole bunch of
money on research dead ends. There's a lot of interest in it already. And the problem's, I think,
much more constrained. I'll know once I've made up a set of whatever brackets that have, you know,
the different fields set against each other. And I'm still thinking about whether even the quantum
bio versus nanotechnology one works. I think that the quantum one actually works
for me most clearly in a very different way. Like we have made our first foray into quantum
computing conversations. And so we got a Yale professor who studies quantum computing, who designed
one of the first like hardware quantum computers. I think he also came up with like the essential
operating topology. To come on the show, he's a fundamental physicist, a theoretician. And we're
like, can you explain to us the Stern-Gerlach experiment? And can you explain it to us in a way
that like tip to tail, where we're able to run through all of the possible different explanations,
right? Because they're at this point where they're like, the thing that we're stuck on is error
correction. And error correction is at the atomic scale. And so they have these atoms that they have
held in place with lasers or whatever photo tweezers they're using. And then things are breaking because
the quantum computer goes from being a quantum computer to suddenly no longer being entangled,
to suddenly being like, it just behaves in this weird way. And so I'm like, okay,
I think that you have to make sure that your paradigm for understanding the atoms
is really, really good because- Or at least spin. I think that, I mean,
Stern-Gerlach, for everybody who's listening, if you don't know this, is the essentially the definition
of this super, it's where this idea of superposition comes from experimentally,
which is showing that there's this quantized property called spin, which doesn't behave how
the theorists expected it to behave originally. So the experiment is set up in such a way that
they have a vacuum chamber with a piece of silver in it. They evaporate and heat the
evacuate the chamber and heat the silver until they get a gas of silver atoms. And then they
organize them by passing them through a couple of different pores and then through a magnetic field.
And classically, you should expect that as you pass them through the magnetic field, that you get this
smear of atoms on the back wall that is basically representative of the shape of the spray of
atoms as they come into your magnetic field. What they get, obviously, is they get a bimodal
distribution where everything is either spin up or spin down. And so this is foundationally the qubit,
which is that you have an atom that is either in a superposition state or it's in spin up or spin down.
And so you're resolving it based off of how its superposition state is red. And we're talking to
them and we're like, well, hold on a second. Doesn't the Stern-Gerlach experiment make sense if you're
treating each atom as like a little bar magnet that's tumbling when you throw it into the magnetic field.
And so it's either based off of the angular momentum of the atom, you're never going to see anything that
goes straight. You're going to see things that either go up or down because they're little tiny bar magnets.
And it was really weird because you could tell that it was necessary for him for there to be some
kind of spooky superposition that was occurring.
Oh, weird.
As opposed, he was like, the atom is like a gyros, you can model it as a gyroscope. And so it's,
the angular momentum doesn't matter because when you throw it into the fields, it, the axis will
process, but it won't tumble relative to it. And then Shiloh was like, but what about spin?
Well, it's like spin isn't gyroscopic fundamentally. Like it has this weird symmetry, right? That requires
like, essentially complex mathematics spinner notation from Dirac's treatment. And the result
is that you have a rotation that has 720 degree symmetry, which is very difficult to model as a
simple wheel on a bar.
And the point is this, that like, this appears to be the place. What is it?
I was gonna say, he kind of gaslit me about it.
He did a little bit.
It was kind of like, no, they're basically like, uh,
Gyroscopes.
Yeah. They're basically gyroscopes. And I'm like, ah, okay.
See, I've, I've encountered this. I've encountered cases where I think one of the things that as,
you know, sort of, I feel like we're, you know, looking at the systems and forming like a
revolutionary force to help like bring science back into alignment. I've found that scientists
use metaphors that are misleading to explain things. And then you need to have enough technical
knowledge to be able to point out that the thing they said is not actually literally true or doesn't
make sense. And then once you do that, they like go back and they're like, okay, well, actually,
there is this problem here. And so like, this is the search for the anomalies.
Yeah. I think a bunch of the anomalies are being hidden by the, uh, metaphors and sort of
thought aids that the researchers are using combined with popularization. It's that they,
they use it as part of their thinking in a way where they're not screwing with the math,
but then when they explain it to people, the analogy is supposed to hold literally. And then if you know
enough, you can push back and say, so wait, is it, I mean, yeah. How does spin actually work?
And then they're like, okay, well, you know, we don't really know, you know,
But it's even worse because you're like, you're like, yeah, I know we don't really know, but like,
shouldn't we figure that out? Like, because if we did, maybe we wouldn't be left with this magical
superposition stuff. Maybe we would actually understand that the atoms are in this whatever state
of motion, their surfaces are doing whatever they're doing. And then we can actually have,
like, yes, heightened, uh, predictive ability. Like when it comes to designing these tools,
like now it's not just this like statistical smear. It's like, oh, okay. Okay. Hold on.
The atoms over here are doing are oriented this way that their emotion is doing, you know,
you actually can get to that level. But as long as you're pretending like that's not
a mystery. It's just kind of a tragedy. I could put a hundred percent. This is this. Yes. This is,
this is, this has gotta be, I think people should just do this in like regular it. The challenge is
that if you, uh, I've been able to do this in some conversations about quantum physics, because I know
the philosophy side, not because I know the physics side. So if they say something about the many worlds
interpretation, that's not actually literally true, then I can say, ah, wait, but I, I think that,
yeah, the, the practice of covering over an actual gap in scientific understanding with a nice
explanation that has to stop. We have to be able to see where the anomalies are.
Well, I mean, there's a generational thing about this too, right? Because as a student,
you're fed these analogies and honestly, you're too busy as a student with the rest of life and
all of your projects and everything to really stop and reconsider these foundations. I think
there's, there's very little time aside from the guy in his garage for people who are already working
inside of these systems to stop and really ask questions like, wait a second, shouldn't we actually
understand this spin thing? Which is why taking the technological approach to it is so valuable,
because the way that I've always constructed this is I'm like, okay, well, the paradigm that wins is
the one that does something useful. Like you have a mess of paradigms, one of them will eventually
build the steam engine and then you're off to the races because you have everything that follows.
But if you have somebody that's trying to build the steam engine and they're like,
fuck, we can't figure out this part. Like it doesn't make any sense or it's breaking all the time.
And then you're like, okay, we need somebody who can figure out this part. And then you fund based off of
that, then all of a sudden you don't have to have somebody come up with the theory
and then make a bunch of predictions and then build a machine. Like you're, you're spreading out
the labor of figuring out what actually is amongst the people that are actually more intuitively
aligned with it. Like Shiloh's always talking about this where he's like, God, it probably would
be better if science was organized where there was somebody who was coming up with the experiments that
should be done. Somebody that was collecting the data and somebody else that was analyzing the data.
And then maybe like another person who's like telling the story of what all this means.
From like, if you want to make it an institution that's all vertically integrated.
Sure.
Yeah. I mean, this occurred to me like historically when I worked in cancer research because
like I started off, like before I even went to grad school, I was working in all these labs
and like that translation of cancer research into actually useful medicines is abysmal.
I was saying it doesn't work sometimes it does, but the success stories are really,
really few and far in between compared to how much work is going on. And it's because
people need that R01, you know, they're willing to like, kind of look at their data, like,
it's got an effect. You know, we just do 200 more mice in this experiment, like that p-value will pop
open a little bit. And like, all of a sudden, like, here's the problem, you know, we can, and it's like,
like, I get it. Like, I understand, like, you got, I'd be hack all the time.
No, but no, not that. I mean, I've literally one of my first, the first time, like my little heart
was broken when I got into all this was, I was just like a little lab grunge right after college
working in a lab. And I got invited to go and visit the statisticians in their lofty office,
you know, in this other building, it was fun, because I got to get out of lab for a day and like,
go to this meeting at this big, fancy table and everything. And like, the conclusion of the
statisticians was like, yeah, you just need more numbers in order to make this results impactful.
And it was like, just such an obvious case for me where I'm like, wait a second, like, this is how
we're going to move forward with our understanding of this system is just to show that it's more
important than it appears to be at this point in time.
So like to take the same cancer paradigm, imagine that the way that we approached the treatment
of cancer was not, okay, we have a bunch of labs, and everybody's pumping out small molecule
inhibitors, and we're going to screen all of them in mice, and we're going to work our way to maybe
one out of a million, that's a hit, and we'll be able to decrease the mortality rate of cancer by,
you know, 10% in a small population of Southeast Asian women of Israeli descent. Okay, great.
What if we figured out, okay, well, these are people who are diagnosed with cancer,
and these are the interventions that they do. And this is what appears to their cancers go away,
right? Because you hear stories about this.
Yeah, I mean, the cases where, yeah, I think you're talking about things that are considered to be
anomalous, and that, yeah, yeah. So, so no, no, I'm, I'm, look, I'm 100% in favor of investigating those
things. I think that there's a tricky thing with tying it to what's useful. I think you ultimately
want the things to be useful. But a lot of the developments are end up so like with electricity,
electricity is a great example. 1600. Gilbert, William Gilbert figures out that he thinks
everything's a magnet, roughly, is the one who discovers the Earth's magnetic field. But when you rub
amber, it attracts leaves and chaff. And he's like, that's not magnetism. That's some other thing.
Let's call it electricity. Okay, cool. Electricity discovered. This does not end up being particularly
useful until you get to electric light. And now we have computers. And so several hundred years on,
the thing ends up being, no pun intended, shockingly useful. But it's really, really hard to see how you
could foresee any of that. Like you have to go from static electric attraction to conduction to,
you know, actually having, you know, wires and batteries and, and light and, and so forth. I think that
that this is, this is why I, I think that there's two things you want to have whoever is helping to
run the, you know, manage whatever new institutions of science come into existence. I think you want them
to have some scientific knowledge themselves. I think you want them to be trained in philosophy so that
they can think very logically about relevant things and imagine different possibilities.
But I think we also want to start breaking down the barrier between the technical experts and
everyone else. This is sort of continuing on the idea of, well, sometimes the experts are hiding
uncertainties or mysteries underneath analogies of different types. I, you know, so I've been learning
about quantum biology for the last year and a half. And usually quantum physics, it's like, so, you know,
intimidating. It's, you know, people say, if you think you understand quantum physics, then you don't.
And that person's a famous quantum physicist. And so are you supposed, what are you supposed to do?
One of the things that I've been doing, working with Clarice Yellow is
working to figure out how to explain the things in a way that does not mislead, does not introduce
inaccuracy, but is also understandable by regular people. And so far, this, it, I've found that this
is a feasible thing to do. I think that the, if you want, here's a, here's a theory that maybe fits
some data points. I don't fully know if it's true, but, you know, we think about the history of,
history of, of research. You've got people who want to study the stars and study the mysteries of
the universe. Ah, but how do they fund themselves? Well, they have a bunch of knowledge. They could
teach your children. Okay. So you have the astronomer who funds their research through
education. You'll note that matches how funding works with universities today. You have the smart,
you know, learned researchers who study the universe, and then they also educate your children.
Well, there's a, a sort of,
a bit of a possibility of perverse incentives here, where if you really manage to transmit the knowledge,
then you might not have as much of a product to sell anymore. It's like, you've, you've explained
it. Okay. People understand it. You don't need an advanced degree. Actually, it is understandable
enough. Well, if you don't need an advanced degree, then how useful you are, how needed you are as an
educator goes down. So I think there is a natural tendency, and this is sort of, uh, I think of this as
the infinite library. It's like, you go into the university and you see the stacks heading off,
you know, endlessly in all directions. And you're like, wow, it's impossible to ever know. And it's like,
yep, that's designed to make it so that the, uh, that, that helps to solidify the position
of the researcher education business model, to put it that way. It's an interesting question how
things should be funded, but I think that that's all gone too far and that we should really, really
be working to reduce the size of technical specialties. Like the way you would do this is
by figuring out how to translate more and more of it out to the point that people could actually
understand the things. The more you manage to train, it's not like you're cutting information out,
you're figuring out how to bridge between regular people and, um, and the actual science. And so I
think that's a possible thing. I think it's not an easy thing to do, but I've had great luck in
conversations with scientists where they say something, I do not know what they're saying.
And then I say, okay, so you're saying it's a, it's like a sponge and they're like, yeah, like, okay,
but is it not a spot? Is there, am I right? Can you like, they're like, well, okay, it's not exactly
a sponge. I'm like, okay. So is it like a sponge with a hard core? And they're like,
okay, that actually is a pretty good metaphor. And I'm like, okay, great. Um, the, I just think it is
possible to bridge the gap, at least way more than people have between what is commonly understood,
what we all can discuss here, not being experts in all the different fields and the technical
disciplines themselves. So this is related to so many things. Shiloh has multiple times pointed out
that is it the equations of fluid dynamics that are universal across all those different phenomena?
If you just go to the transport phenomena Wikipedia page, you'll see these, it's like diffusion,
heat flow. There's a bunch of them. They're all congruent. So there's a bunch of natural phenomena
that can be described by the same mathematics, which implies that if you're trying to simplify
some kind of phenomenon to something that is more intuitive, if they're mathematically congruent,
then it's possible to actually make the analogy and have it be accurate.
Yeah. Yeah. And so I think that that's really valuable where you're like, it's not quite the
sponge because they're thinking almost mathematically about like, well, there's this other modulus that's
in there. And then you stick the heart, they're like the backbone to it. And they're like, yeah.
Okay, great. So I think that that's really useful. I think being able to put things into
lenses that people can understand and do something with is really useful. Like you were saying earlier
that perhaps having a really, really extensive STEM education is detrimental to your ability to do
something weird and crazy in STEM. And it might be because at some point you've memorized so many things
that you've lost your ability to be creative because you're just, you're overfitting the data.
You're like, this is how it is. I know all of these answers already. And so, okay, great. My thought
about the like start at the technology and work backwards is now that that inherently lends itself
to cloistering because usually when somebody is trying to develop a technology, they're doing it
inside of a market driven system where they want to be able to figure out how to optimize it to the next
level. And they want to be able to maintain that knowledge for themselves. And so you can't really
depend on it being a technology back process of figuring out because if Phillips figures out
how to build the first quantum computer, they're not going to tell you. They're like, that's going
to be under 10 layers of NDA for the next hundred years, plus protected by patents and everything
else to make sure nobody else can touch it. There's a lot of scarcity mindset going on here that's creeping
into the cracks of the standard institutional models, right? It's like, I think that a lot of that
initiation that you're, you hinted at it a little bit. I can't remember the exact words you used,
but you're like, do they really want to hand over the knowledge to you so easily? Or do you have to
like prove that you can sit in the classroom for a year and then you go to this 200 level course.
And it's like, if I was going to design a cult, you know, like a Scientology type thing, like that's
exactly how I would set it up. I'm like, all right, so you got to get through the first chamber
and like pay your respect to, you know, the grand wizard at the, whatever the hell it is.
But maybe by the time that you've like put in $200,000 to this thing and, you know, we've given
you the paper that you need to get you in the door at this job that you want. Maybe I'll tell you,
like, you've gotten to wear your professor's Nobel medal for a minute.
Yeah. So you can park in his Nobel parking place at Berkeley. Have you seen those things?
Yeah, so there is this almost Machiavellian layer to the way that institutions seem to naturally
arrange themselves that that is protectionist. And, and I don't know how you get around that
exactly because you're right. Like things are, you should be able to explain your,
your scientific theory to like your grandma, like at least on a,
surface level. And if there's a part in it, like, like electron spin that you don't understand,
just say, we don't understand it. Yeah.
Yeah, I completely agree with that. The, um, well, I think, um, we mentioned
Samo Borya earlier. He has a really good framework for thinking about, um, uh, institutions and, uh,
he's got this sort of framework called empire theory, where he talks about whether
the institutions or the empires are, um, expanding versus declining, um, and whether they're centralized
versus decentralized. And I found it to be a useful framework, but essentially the way you would model
a lot of the existing scientific institutions is as declining centralized. So it's, if it's expanding,
then you get a different set of dynamics. If it's declining, then if it's decentralized,
parts break off and seek their own fortune. If it's declining centralized, it's like the center
is trying to hold all the pieces in. So that everything sort of goes down together and that,
but that way the, I mean, it's not necessarily conceived that way, but it's like, they don't,
they're not letting parts break off and do their own thing. Um,
Isn't it interesting about the mythological parallels between science as an institution
that is going down the drain and taking everything with it and the idea that like at the center of
each galaxy, there's a massive black hole that's gobbling everything up that will devour the universe.
Like, it just seems like there's multiple layers of mythological patterning that you start to see
when you think about the stories that are being told where they're like, this is how the universe
works. And it is the one place where we have these sorts of stories.
And that's, oh man, I'm going to need to think of a positive sort of astronomical sort of, you know,
like, you know, companion myth or something. The, cause I think in the face of a declining
centralized empire, the thing you do is you just build outside of it. It's, it's the, you try not
to fight. Um, and, uh, maybe sometimes that's unavoidable, but the usually in things like that,
their focus is, um, internal. And so, I mean, I have been just extremely encouraged by how
easy it is to build outside and by, by how easy, I, I don't mean this is very easy at all. I mean,
that, um, so just as a simple example, so history of science research, the, it turns out there's an
important thing that's missing from history of science research, and that is an accessible data
set. So we're here talking about the history of science and we each have a couple data points
in our mind. And I just finished, you know, Kun instructor of scientific revolutions and he's
mentioning, you know, a bunch of different discoveries, but he's doing pretty shallow dives
on each of them. Some of them we've actually checked out deeper dive style and the details
actually differ. You actually need to do a deep dive on each of the discoveries. And then it just
turns out that no one has, has done this yet. So this is sort of a plug for my history of science
research program. But if you actually count up how many major discoveries have there been in the
history of science, we tried to estimate it as obviously lossy, but we think it's like between
200 and 300. Um, that's actually when, and you know, obviously as you dial up or down what counts as
major, you can get larger or smaller numbers, but history of electricity, it's like somewhere between
12 and 14 from Gilbert to Maxwell. And then there's magnetism and astronomy and geology and etc.
It's not that many. And each case study takes, you know, you want to do a case study on each,
it takes, let's say six months to a year. Well, for let's say it's, you know, a year each,
and it's 200, you know, cases, that's 200 person years, and it sounds like a lot of person years,
but not really, that's actually a really small number of person years. And it's been possible to
find researchers, they're qualified, they're, they're people both inside and outside academia,
that we've been able to employ. Um, there, uh, you can, it is sort of shocking to me that this
hasn't happened, just like the, here's the study on all of the major discoveries with the main
question being, how did it happen? Why did it happen now, as opposed to like, could it, you know,
is, and as far as you can, could it have happened faster? Like, what are the rate limiting steps?
Like, what's the, what's the, what's the actual discovery? In one case, we found that people
hadn't pinned what the actual discovery was. Um, but it's like, what's the actual discovery?
How did the person make it? It's like military history, except it's like with military history,
people, you get these military history buffs, who love to study previous battles, just because
you don't have a big data set. Every case is super important. So you want to learn everything you can
from every actual conflict that has happened. Same thing's true in science, right? It's, you know,
there aren't that many total discoveries. Each one is different in some way. You want to learn
whatever lessons you can from it. Okay, great. But so we've had, you know,
I'd say basically no trouble finding qualified people to do it. No trouble with actually having
them do the research. Um, we also haven't had trouble getting it published in mainstream outlets.
And we ourselves are, you know, outside academia. So it's independent, but it's like entirely
backwards compatible. It's like, it's very friendly. Um, and so I think that the history of science is
just like, there's this project getting the basic data set on successful science that just can be done.
There's nothing stopping it because you can, you can just do it. Sometimes you need a bunch of money
to build cool instruments. That's Clarice's case. That one, you need several million dollars to build the
fancy instrument, but we may actually end up succeeding in raising that money. In which case,
that's another case where you can just build outside of the existing system and science continues.
What is the example of the discovery where you realized that the actual discovery hadn't been
properly identified? This is, so it's amazing. Um, so it's Francis Foxby. Um, and the reason it's amazing is that
he there, the Royal society now has an award, which I think is called the Hawksby award. Um, but it's for
the unsung heroes of science. It's for the unrecognized people, the people who are doing the work in the
background and, you know, not being rewarded for it. So we, we, we looked into it cause we're doing all
the, uh, we're doing the whole history of electricity to start with. And turns out Hawksby was not actually an
unsung hero. He just, he, um, he was from a different social class than other people at the
Royal society that didn't seem to pose a barrier. He was an instrumental, he was an instrument maker.
He was funded to perform experiments. Everything seemed fine. He was recognized. He was also Newton's
assistant. Like, so, you know, no problem in terms of recognition, but then as we looked at modern
scholarship on it, we found that people knew that he had done something important. And
as far as we can tell, we have a paper that at some point we'll publish on this when,
you know, whenever that seems relevant. Um, but they hadn't identified exactly what he did. So it
didn't turn out that there was some weird paradoxical way in which he was an unsung hero.
The thing he did was isolating electric light. So the, the, the tricky thing is that people had
bumped into electric lights. You have this case of Boyle where he rubs a diamond and gets some light.
There were other people who had come across the phenomenon of electric light. The problem was that
there were all sorts of things that produced light. It was like bioluminescence and there's regular fire.
And you have these like big lists of who, uh, you know, a big list of things that produce light.
The thing Hawksby did was he took existing air pumps as the, you know, early vacuum chamber,
uh, made it better, um, in such a way that it was possible to run experiments in it,
created a vacuum, put electric materials like amber in it, and then rubbed them. And the thing you find
is that the vacuum quenches or puts out regular fire, but it causes electric light to become brighter.
And that should, and because it's happening with a substances that produce static electric attraction,
when you rub them, this shows that there is an, uh, that the electrical substances are themselves
producing light and the light is different from the light, uh, produced by regular fire. And so it's
ice experimentally isolating electric light as its own phenomenon. That's the thing he did.
That might seem like the tiniest detail, but it's super weird if you have a data set and you're like,
this guy was important and you've like got a fuzzy circle around what he did instead of a sharp circle.
I mean, it's a crazy question to start to figure out where these lines of scientific
realization boiled down to. And I'm surprised that it's not more frequent that you stumble on
something where you start to dig and you're like, that's fucking weird.
It seems like this would be really useful in, in the service of addressing, who was it?
Was it Austin? He was talking about the NIH panel that was unable to determine which research projects
would be successful compared to mere chance? No, it was, uh, Keon, who was at the patron chat.
Oh, yeah, yeah. Yeah, one of our patrons. Where it was like, the, uh, ability of the NIH
to predictively fund research that would lead to publications was almost non-existent.
Uh, well cited, you know, they, they judged the success of the research.
Wait, that would lead to publications? No, lead to, lead to publications that get cited often.
That's how they measure, that's how they measure the success of a project.
And so they, they were basically, I think, worse than...
I believe that. Yeah, I believe that.
They're like, we could just throw a dart at a wall and like, that would work just as well.
But we put all this effort into triaging these and trying to, yeah.
In a lot of cases, what's happening is that the panels at NSF, NIH, or the decision makers
are frequently relying on expert judgment, uh, from academia.
So you, you have judgments being outsourced.
And then I think specialization is a, is a serious problem.
It's, you have specialization, plus everyone feels like there is a scarcity of funding.
There may actually be, but at least people feel like there is.
And this causes people to develop these sort of like quasi advocate positions,
where it's not just that they're a scientist who happens to be investigating X.
And now it's, it's that they're an advocate for X.
And that means they're tacitly an advocate for not the things that might get,
you know, the other things that might compete with X.
And so, and I haven't worked out the picture here fully.
There's, there's some way this relates to the peer review phenomenon.
So we all know peer review is having issues.
Scientists aren't super motivated to do it.
They frequently give, you know, give, uh, peer review is frequently do I,
at least people report it's, do I agree with your thing rather than is this science well done?
I haven't pinned this down, but I think there's something like the scarcity of
funding plus specialization is making it so that people don't end up being super good
judges of everybody else's work.
I came across a really terrifying AI tool recently called consensus.
And it is in a professor Dave video.
Yeah.
He's advertising this for those who know the, uh, the glory that is professor Dave.
Um, it is an AI tool that allows you to query the scientific literature and it tells you what you
should believe on the basis of what is consensus.
Like it tells you what consensus is in the literature for a given question.
And it's marketed as basically a way for you to be able to appropriately shape your beliefs.
Is it just called consensus?
Okay.
Yeah.
I've, I think I've found it.
I think there's like this real, I think this scarcity mindset is a real pollution in the whole world
in general, like, but I think we could narrow it down to academia and ideas as well.
Like I see people who they have a cool idea and they devote the rest of their career to prosecuting
that idea.
And I feel like that's, that sort of behavior is, is driven by this belief that having cool ideas is
a rare and scarce thing.
Like, I think if I've also met incredible people who are just, they'll just throw out really crazy,
cool ideas all the time and they won't prosecute them and try to convince you of them.
They'll just say stuff and move on.
And like, those are my favorite types of people, but I feel like academia selects for the people
who are willing to, you know, play that game and just dig their teeth in and, and hold onto this
thing and just march it through 40 years of the career, publishing incremental pieces on it and
so on and so forth.
We were saying academia doesn't have those people or, or yeah, that's, that's interesting.
Yeah.
I I'd love to understand better what the,
because this was one, one of the re we were trying to figure out why haven't people
done this history of science project I described, right?
It just seems like imagine if there was this nice little index of 200 or 300 discoveries where you
could read a nice synopsis. And then there's also this nice long paper in case you want to learn more
that tells you, you're like, okay, please tell me what actually happened with Maxwell. And the answer is
blah. The, um, and one of the answers that we came to was that academic freedom, which is good in a bunch of
ways essentially allows people to follow winding paths, as opposed to staying on one thing for 40
years. Like you're describing, this is one of the reasons that I'm such a fan of, uh, focused research
organizations. Um, if you've heard this term, this is a thing that's being experimented with now. It's
like, there's a couple different formats. Um, but essentially it's sort of a hybrid between a startup
and an academic group and some other things, but essentially it's mission driven and it, uh, you know,
isn't necessarily aiming for publications in the short run, but there is, there is some goal that it's aiming at.
I think that the, that's like a really good way to do it. Um, and you could imagine it's like,
you know, if you have 10 people, each of whom do a case study, say we get the process a bit more
efficient, it's six months each, they do two per year. Cool. It takes 10 people, 10 years to do 200.
Then that actually, then you produce this thing that's like really substantial public value.
And I don't think that that, that doesn't happen naturally inside an environment where
you have essentially lots of researcher freedom, obviously researcher freedom again is good for a
bunch of things, but I like the focused projects. I also wonder if it isn't partially because science
has been working relatively well for a relatively long time. And I think that when things work well and
you're able to make technological gains and every decade seems to be like you're better off than the
previous one, it's like, why spend all this effort figuring out what it takes to make really fantastic
science? Like you kind of, you're, you're living in the spoils of it. And so there's a really strong
tendency to not overanalyze when things work. And it's only when things start to break down and people
start to look around because like, I don't think we could have had this conversation 40 years ago.
Yeah.
Like not even necessarily because of the technological limitations. I just think that
people would have laughed you out of the room. They're like, science is great. Science is doing
just fine.
Well, but this, this, this, um, gets to the, uh, the point about the change in science after World War II,
where I think about it as a big experiment. It's, you know, you have the atomic bomb,
Manhattan project, then you have Sputnik. Okay, fine. We want to scale up science. Then science gets scaled up.
Um, I think it's like 40 years ago, just like we're in the eighties. I think the experiment was still a
little too early. I mean, a ton of biology was coming through in the eighties, right? It was molecular
cloning. It was figuring out all of these, the ability to take the insulin gene and put it into yeast
to like VAT produce medicines. Like all of this stuff was still like biology was exploding in the eighties
because it was the first time that we actually had like modern techniques to actually be able to do
the kind of industrial biochemistry that we just take for granted today.
I think this makes me wonder how fast we want science to go. Cause when I think of that, I then
think, well, couldn't we have that occurring in all the fields at the same time? And then I think that,
wow, that would be, that would be crazy. Would does society actually have the ability to absorb
that amount? I don't think it does. I really, really, really actually think that it does not.
And I think that if you think about what happens to us after the atom bomb, I think you, what happens
to us after like roundup ready crops, what happens to us after the invention of radio and television?
Yeah. I think we're still like way far from being able to figure it out. And I, I don't know,
maybe this is actually a good place to, to, to rest on this question of like, how fast should we be
going? We're preoccupied with, well, we should be going fast. Clearly there's ways to optimize how fast
we go. And then there is also in the back room, this question of like, well, hold on a second. What
happens to us when we go fast? Do we know? I mean, you want your institutions to be sort of slow
moving and some, I mean, that's why government is impossible to get anything done in too. It's like,
well, yeah, but that's kind of nice also because you don't have to like expect a completely new form
of government every morning when you wake up. And it's like, that's nice. And I understand that that's
why we lean on institutions because they're dependable in that sort of slow, oafish way.
But man, I wanted to, we didn't even get to talk about some of your other work too,
because I really was interested in talking to you about the psychology stuff. But we're,
we've almost done three hours here. So I don't know, maybe, maybe we'll have the chance to talk again.
Sure. This has been a great conversation. I think the, the, the pace question, I think is a really,
really good one. I think there's a slogan that a bunch of my team and I always had,
which is go slow to go fast. Like the reason you'd want things to go slower is so they don't
jam up or explode or be bad for people because you actually want it to go fast. So it's like,
we do want it to go fast, but that doesn't mean you make all the parts of it go fast. You want to find
what's the rate that human society, what's the rate that we as people can actually absorb scientific
and technological change. And I don't yet know the answer to that, but it's, yeah, I don't know. I,
it's, it's a great place to rest the conversation.
I think it terminates on the tiptoeing the line of order and chaos, which has been like a mythological,
it's like the foundational mythological cosmology of almost every single culture going all the way
back. It's like, even in your own life, right? Like you can get overordered, a government can
become overstructured and then it starts resembling some fascist totalitarian hellscape. But you can also
be overly chaotic, right? And then, you know, you're just tripping over your clothes trying to
get dressed in the morning or whatever it is. Right. But so, so striking that balance seems to
be critical and it's, it's not an easy task, but anyways, I'm cracking open cans of worms so we don't
have time to finish. I just, yeah, I think that, uh, we should put this conversation out and then see
how it plays. And if people enjoy it, then we should plan to have another one because there's a lot left
here. I, I want to say thank you for, for taking the time. I know that three hours is a big block,
especially on a Sunday afternoon. And I just, I really appreciate it. And for putting us in touch
with, is it, uh, James Sinka? James Sinka. Yeah. Yeah. So he's, he's going to help us figure out,
uh, or he's going to convince us that crypto is a good application for long-term projects.
And then we've got Clarice coming. And so it's going to be really good to get the whole picture of this.
So I appreciate you kicking it off. Before we let you go, uh, people want to
learn more about your work. What's the best way to read about you and maybe get in contact,
anything like that? Uh, yeah. So, um, for, uh, contact people and just check out my Twitter
handles at Jeff Anders and send me a message, um, for my work, um, leverage.institute.
That's, uh, we got a new website going, coming up in ideally the next couple of days actually. Um, but
we're really trying to essentially it's research projects or research programs that pick out areas
in science and technology that we think are stuck. We think can be unstuck. History of science is one
mentioned psychology. Um, we've been helping Clarice with quantum biology. Um, but the,
the bigger vision is that there's all of this great stuff out there that can be discovered that
is being discovered. Um, and we want to help people understand it and we want to push the things, uh,
forward at the right pace. I love it. Yeah. That's what we need. We need, uh, those parallel bridges
before we rip down the old ones. Absolutely. And hey, we're in the bay probably like five or six
times a year. So we might hit you up the next time we come down, grab a cup of coffee. Uh,
I actually live on the east coast. Whoops. That won't work out. For some reason I thought you were
based in the bay. Uh, I, I was, um, and yeah, and my organization leverage was based in the bay from 2013
through 2022, I guess. Um, but yeah, no, now in the east coast, but we don't, we never get back there.
Yeah. Well, let's stay in touch. Maybe, maybe, uh, physical puzzle for us. Okay. Very cool. All
right. Thanks a lot, Jeff. All right. See you guys. Bye everybody.
Bye.
