Today's eerily impressive artificial intelligence writing tools present us
with a crucial challenge.
As writers, do we unthinkingly adopt AI's time-saving advantages, or do we
stop to weigh what we gain and what we lose when heeding its siren call?
Today's guest, the linguist and educator, leads us on a journey connecting the
dots between human literacy and today's technology.
It's tempting to take the easy way out and let AI do the work for us.
Our guest cautions that this efficiency is not always in our interest.
As AI piles us with suggestions or full-blown text, we risk losing not
just our technical skills, but the power of writing as a springboard for
professional reflection and unique expression.
It is an honor to welcome Professor Emerita of Linguistics in the Department
of World Languages and Cultures at American University in Washington, DC.
Author of 10 books and another one on the way.
And the focus of today's episode is her book, Who Wrote This?
How AI and the Lure of Efficiency Threatened Human Writing.
Naomi S.
Barron, welcome to the show.
Thank you so much, Aidan.
I'm delighted to be here.
It's great to have you on the show, Naomi.
I have so much, so many questions.
You inspired so much thinking, which is actually the point of all this in the first place.
And I thought I'd start with something a little bit off the beaten track here.
I was going to do this as the intro, but I thought people would actually go, am I on the right show?
So I fed Google's notebook LLM with a number of your YouTube interviews and I got it to generate its own interview about that.
So I'm going to play a little bit of that and it will inspire us to have a little bit of a chat about what came out of this and indeed your own experiences with this.
Today, we're diving deep into her work, her insights, because she was looking at this stuff way before chat GPT was even like a twinkle in some coder's eye.
That's pretty amazing.
Talk about a long view.
Oh, seriously.
Yeah.
So we're going to try to unpack, you know, what she has to say about AI, changing how we communicate, like the whole landscape of language.
I'm excited.
This could be good.
Me too.
And honestly, what strikes me is how Professor Barron gets at this core question.
Like what even IS language, right?
She digs into research from way back, like teaching Shemp sign language.
Really?
Yeah.
And how all that helps us understand, you know, AI and language today.
It's really fascinating.
Yeah.
Cause it's not just about AI spitting out words.
It's about meaning, you know, intent, even like emotion, maybe.
Totally.
And that's enough of that, Naomi.
Let's go back to the humans.
You had your own experience.
It's really good.
It's absolutely incredibly good.
A Dean of a college I know said to me, he said, you're in trouble with your podcast.
Now these guys are better than you.
They don't make the same mistakes you make.
And I was like, oh, I think people like my mistakes.
I heard about deep dive, deep dive being the audio option in Google notebook LM.
This audio option just came online in September, I believe mid-September.
And there was a whole rash of articles in the New York Times and the Washington Post and the MIT Technology Review and so forth saying, wow, do you know what this is?
So I thought, well, let's find out what it can do.
And what I did is I took a chapter that a colleague and I had written for a book that's just about to come out.
And then I, and I put that into notebook and said, please generate me.
I just pushed the button.
That was my way of saying please to generate this roughly 10 minute long deep dive that creates a podcast with a he and a she voice based on the material.
That's in that, in that notebook, namely my chapter or my book proposal, the, when I first listened to the book proposal, I literally had tears in my eyes.
Not because I loved hearing about my work, but because of the incredible ability of AI to do things that a year ago, probably even six months ago, we could not have imagined possible.
Not just the quality of the voices and, and, and, and the she voice is way too chirpy and eventually greats on you.
And eventually many.
Totally, totally, totally, totally.
Um, 15 seconds.
And I've had various people have listened to this comment and I can't listen to this anymore.
The content for the book chapter was actually pretty accurate and it was eerily accurate.
Then came the book proposal and I actually, having just sent the written proposal to my editor, I sent the link to the deep dive and I said, so now you don't have to read proposals anymore.
All you have to do is listen.
And she immediately got back to me and said, but what's totally missing totally from this podcast is your humor, the nuance, the literary examples that you included, the asides, the, the, the character of your writing is totally missing.
So no, I'm not going to use this for proposals because I'd have no idea how this author could write.
The other thing that happened is that the first half of the podcast was accurate in terms of the content that I had in my proposal, but then it started veering into things that might've been nice for me to do, but were not part of my work.
And it reminded me of what's happening with the company perplexity now, which is being sued by a number of news outlets.
And what perplexity is doing is taking as training data, a lot of news information, which it may not legally have the right to, the courts will decide, and generating what is accurately in the original news source.
So anyone who tells you, well, if you feed in the data to an AI and only the data that you want discussed in, whether it's a written form or whether it's an audio version, because the audio overlay these days is comparatively simple.
And, and, and we're not going to have any hallucination of the sort of stuff that's false.
We're not going to have any bias and all that kind of stuff.
Do not believe it because I heard it with my own ears.
It brings up something that I have to apologize to our audience as well.
I am definitely not going to be a able in today's show because I'm going to go all over the place.
And I'm just going to spark off things that you say, Naomi, because one of the things there is authorship.
So if I, for example, played a clip from a movie in this show, or I played some music that I didn't have the rights to, what happens on YouTube is you can't have any monetary gain from it.
So it's exempt from having any type of advertising and it's flagged to the owner of that.
And when I played that piece from the LLM from notebook, I was like, oh, and who owns that?
And I know you talk a lot about this because this is something that's in the minds of many people.
Maybe somebody has used an AI heavily for their book.
Maybe somebody has written music with it.
Maybe somebody has created music with it or visuals and oftentimes they'll think is like, who owns this?
This is the fight that at least in the United States is aggressively being waged right now.
Perhaps the first lawsuit, more than a year ago now, came from the New York Times when it said to OpenAI and to Microsoft, thou shalt not have this data unless you pay for it.
And that case has not been settled.
But other kinds of things are now happening that are terribly worrisome.
It's not just the news outlets that are, at least in the States, signing licensing agreements with a number of the companies.
So let's start with OpenAI and with Microsoft and with Google and with Meta.
But it's also publishers of books and publishers of journal articles.
So one of the most recent things that happen is Taylor and Francis, which is a huge publishing conglomerate.
It publishes lots of academic journals.
I have articles in Taylor and Francis journals.
I have a book in a Taylor and Francis company, Rutledge, and that licensing agreement was signed by Taylor and Francis with whichever of the large big tech companies it signed with.
And the licensing monies go to Taylor and Francis.
Now, for journal articles, Taylor and Francis, like most academic journal publishers, Taylor and Francis holds the copyright.
You know, you're not allowed to have copyright for most journal articles, academic journal articles.
But for books, thank you, I hold the copyright, which means in principle, I should be getting some revenue.
I mean, five cents, you know, two pence, you know, a shilling, it takes whichever level of a euro of penny, but whatever you want.
It's not for the money.
It's for the fact that it's I hold the copyright, but I have no control over how my copyrighted material is being used.
And that is extremely troublesome.
In some ways, this is reminiscent of what happened when Google Books started scanning books in order to make information free, right?
And then there was the question of how much of the book is exposed on Google Books.
And some pages were available, some pages weren't.
Some authors allowed all of their books to be there.
And then a number of organizations in the United States, the Authors Guild and I think it was the American Association of Publishers, sued and said, wait a second, you are taking copyrighted material and making that available.
For a decade, the lawsuits went back and forth and eventually they would be settled and then they were reopened.
And it took 10 years to finally say, I guess this is fair use, Google, you may post what you want, as long as it's snippets, but snippets can be huge amounts of text.
So it's this, it wasn't for the money that the authors wanted to have protection of their copyright.
It was because they were the authors and they wanted the rights to control what was done with their work.
And they lost it with Google Books.
And I don't know what's going to happen.
Nobody knows what's going to happen with the suits that are going to come, either from individual authors or groups of authors who are having their style stolen from them.
Because you take all the books of name your favorite author living because it's easier to sue if you're alive.
And eventually the copyright does run out, both in the UK and in Europe and in the United States.
But before then, if you have a live author whose work is being taken, there are many lawsuits currently going on saying, you know, to the likes of OpenAI, you may not take my work.
And OpenAI is saying, I didn't take your work.
All we did is took words and we clipped some words here, but we also know your writing style.
No, we're not talking about that in the lawsuit.
And we can create something in your style.
There was a case where the writer Gay Talese had a number of his pieces.
It was a journalist for the Washington Post.
It was a legitimate experiment.
Took the work and fed it into an earlier version of an AI and generated some new Gay Talese text.
And when played to Gay Talese or shown to him because it was written text, Talese said, well, it's not me, but it's bad.
It's sort of close.
And now in the end of 2024, it's going to be darn close.
And the only thing missing is the particular plot or storyline.
That thing about it's good enough, this worries me a lot.
I, I was telling you before we came on air, I'm a lecturer and I'm just coming up to lecture season.
And for years, I mean, I started this module eight years ago and I've always had AI in it and how AI was going to rewrite the rules of society.
And you need to be more adaptive.
You need to have more resilience because you will lose roles very, very quickly.
And one time a student has a joke, made a tinfoil hat and left it on my left.
And my left, which was brilliant.
I thought that was great creativity with a big C.
But my point was always that this was coming and that I think they only started listening last year, that last year was the big shift.
But one of the things I was telling them always to use was tools.
So a tool came out called EssayBot and it's still available.
It's still really, really good.
And EssayBot actually has a button that goes de-plagiarize and a warning comes up and he goes, don't worry if this is going through a plagiarism checker, it won't be detected if you press this button.
So I was telling them this, and the thing was, they thought it was like entrapment and I'm like, I will know if it's written by the AI, but today I don't know.
Today, I checked it today before we came on air to see how good and how advanced it has become.
It's amazing.
And it actually comes up with stuff.
What I like using the AI for is to come up with stuff you just didn't know about or some outlying piece of information that you just didn't think of.
But I'm saying all this to say, and this is how I found your work.
And I'm so sorry I didn't discover your work earlier, but I was writing an article and I was writing about the fact that part of the gift of writing or creativity is the struggle.
It's the, you have to go through, as you well know, or Harry would say, the desert of boredom that sometimes is the case.
It's like, for me, it's like going to the gym, going to the gym, you do the work, you show up, you just keep doing it.
And eventually something will happen for the better.
Either you'll get injured or you'll get in good shape.
But, but the same for, for writing for me.
And I say all that to say that that's how I discovered you.
Cause it was like, surely if you're not exercising this muscle, this mental muscle, I know about digital dementia, but I was like going, surely you're going to have some type of atrophy in the brain.
And this is at the heart of your work, the understanding of this, and I'd absolutely love you to share this because if anybody gets anything out of today's show, please listen to this because this is the point.
You will lose it.
If you don't use it, you will lose it.
You have given me about an hour and a half worth of things to respond.
So I'll take them in sort of the order.
If I get it right, that she's, that she raised issues.
It's tools that can spot plagiarism.
Well, GPT zero was created about a month after, um, Edward Tseng, I think created it about a month after Chachabiti came out, just saying, I wonder if there's a way to figure out if something was written by a human or not.
And that tool has gotten incredibly better over the last two years.
I'm impressed with the work that he's doing and he's doing other kinds of things that are helping people become better writers themselves, rather than just a tool for faculty to say, gotcha, I figured out you did this.
But almost every text generation tool has some kind of plagiarism spotter in it.
And whether they're accurate or not, who knows in the United States, before ChatGPT came out, probably the most popular text generation tool was called PseudoWrite.
And it was using GPT-3.
That is what OpenAI has done is licensed.
First it licensed GPT-3, then GPT-3.5.
And now it's licensing GPT-4, will it license GPT-4?
Oh, I don't know.
We'll find out.
But there are lots and lots of companies that are using the technology that OpenAI has available.
And we're doing so before ChatGPT came on the scene.
So Grammarly, a tool used heavily in the United States, not just by students, but by lots of people in the workplace.
And used around the world by people who are writing in English, particularly people who are not native speakers or fluent speakers of English are using it.
And it has had a plagiarism tool within it.
So will plagiarism always be spotted?
No.
And the reason for that is the way that AI generation works is sometimes it will take whole sentences rather than just individual words when it goes to predict what the next most likely word is going to be, which is the way that LLMs work.
And sometimes it's more word salad and you'd have an incredibly difficult time saying, oh, this came from so-and-so.
Well, if you're a really good writer and reader of literature, you may be able to sense the voice of a writer.
But if the prompt has not been right in the voice of so-and-so, you know, make it sound like Charles Dickens, make it sound like Shakespeare, make it sound like, because you can do that and do a fairly good job.
But if you haven't said, make it sound like so-and-so then probably you won't be able to tell the author's voice.
Okay.
So what does this mean going forward?
You talked about mental muscle.
Mental muscle was a theory put forth in the, well, in the 19th century in particular, and I can speak for the United States.
I can't speak for other countries, but it was a theory put forth as to why it was really important to learn Latin and some Greek would be a good idea too.
Now, were you going to be in your daily life after you graduated from college, were you going to be using, were you going to be reading, writing Latin orations?
No, did you really need to suffer through memorizing all those conjugations and declensions and reading Caesar's Gallic Wars and so forth?
Did you have to do that?
The rationale that was given is that it built up your mental muscle to be used in other kinds of activity.
So it was the journey that was important, not that which you were using that journey for while you were in school.
So as you come to writing, the question is, what's the relationship between writing and thinking?
I'll get to the atrophy in a moment, but first let's talk about the relationship between writing and thinking.
If I were to take both hands and both feet and we use the fingers and toes, I would still not have enough digits for citing the writers who for at least three centuries have said there's a connection between writing and thinking.
You know, there are many versions of this, Flannery O'Connor is the one most often cited in the United States, Joan Didion is often cited, and what is it they're cited as saying?
I only know what I think when I see what I say and say, meaning here, what I write.
I only know what I think when I see what I write, or I only can think when I write.
And what they're telling us is that the human mind is a miraculous, I mean, they're not saying this, but they're presupposing it.
There's a miraculous organ, but one of the things the development of literacy did is it made possible new ways of thinking.
And people have written about this.
Eric Havlock wrote a book, he was a classicist, wrote a book called Preface to Plato, in which he argued, and I agree with half of what he said,
he argued that the development of the Greek alphabet, which was the first alphabet where you had one symbol for each sound.
And it was derived from the Phoenician, Phoenician being a Semitic language, Greek being an Indo-European language.
So they work differently in terms of their sound system.
The Semitic system has a so-called consonantal alphabet.
We only represent the consonants with the symbol, and you sort of have to know when you're reading, which vowels are going to be.
And this is still the case with something like Hebrew.
But what happened with Greek is you actually developed, it was around 800 BC, individual symbols for each sound.
And the argument that Havelock made is that it was the alphabet that made possible Greek philosophy.
Well, I don't think, I don't agree with the alphabet part, but the writing part for darn sure.
There are other things going on in archaic and then classical Greece that made for the Platos and the Aristotles and the Socrates of the time.
Okay.
But what we do know is if you can write something down, you can look at it and reconsider.
You can say, is this really what I mean?
Is this what I think?
It's interesting.
When I was writing Who Wrote This?
And I was working on the chapter on creativity.
I didn't know what I was going to conclude.
I knew the research that I wanted to go through, how I wanted to begin the chapter with talking about the birthplace of Leonardo da Vinci and how we honor him as much as we do his work and so forth.
But I didn't know what I was going to conclude until I was about three quarters of the way through the chapter.
And I said, now I get it.
And what is it that I got?
That human beings care about human beings being creative.
They care about their own creativity levels, which may be fairly minor, or they could be pretty good.
You could win the Booker Prize for your book.
You could win a Nobel Prize for your book.
But we do smaller things as well.
You could get a blue ribbon at a state fair for your apple pie.
State fairs are big things, and county fairs are big things in the United States, where there's still a tad of agriculture left.
So you feel good about that.
You feel you have created something.
Does the world care?
Well, not particularly.
But creativity functions at many levels.
And the conclusion that I came to in the chapter on creativity was that I don't care how good AI is at creating art, at creating music, and at creating writing.
What I care about is whether human beings can create and what it means to us as individuals and as societies to have created something.
The example, I was giving a lecture, I was part of a panel discussion a couple of days ago, and the example that I gave was this.
You walk into a museum, and I was talking about the National Gallery here in Washington, D.C., and you see it all the time.
People walk up to a painting, they see, this was a Leonardo, a Da Vinci, and then they step back and they look at the painting.
But they only are interested in the painting because they saw who created it.
Now, you may say, this is not a good way to appreciate art, but it's a good way to be part of a society that has said, for right or for wrong, this is a great artist.
When the Impressionists started out and they were given this nasty name, Impressionists, this is not actual painting, you know, Van Gogh stuff is junk.
I mean, I don't even see a real cypress tree that can't work out, but we changed our minds over time, and now we come up, you know, there's a big Impressionist exhibit going on right now in the National Gallery, and I promise you there are people going up and reading the tag and then standing back and saying, yeah, that's a really impressive, I'm impressed with the Impressions painting.
So why do we do that?
Because creators are part of our culture, and AI is not, and never will be, part of that human culture.
Beautiful.
Absolutely beautiful.
So I was thinking about this, that a couple of things.
The first is that idea of value attribution.
You'll only give it value when you know who created it.
That's, I mean, we, we see that on this show is the innovation show.
We see that in innovation all the time.
It's, it's not an idea meritocracy.
It depends on where the idea comes from, which actually should have no impact on the idea.
The idea should be the idea.
That's one thing.
But the, the thing that I really, I set out on with all this odyssey of your work, it was, I remember when my older son, when he was younger, was terrible at sport.
Like I was, as a kid, I was off and last picked.
He, he was absolutely that kid and they did a school sports day and he did the race.
So they did this big, long race around these football pitches a few times.
And he was so stressed about doing it.
And I just said, just finish it.
That's all.
It doesn't matter if you realize, just finish.
Uh, so he did, he finished and loads of kids gave up.
But when I was, and I went off, I had to go to work.
So I left, I waited till he was over, went to work, came back later on.
And there was a medal at the door, just on the ground.
And people will think that I'm a terrible dad.
I came in, what's the medal for?
And he's like, oh, they gave us all a medal.
Really proud that you finished, but you didn't win.
And it was one of these moments that was, I think, I think it was so important.
I hope it was.
So I, I said to him, that that's not how the world works.
You don't get a medal just for being there.
And he, he, and he didn't care about the medal.
That was the point.
He didn't care about it.
And I was like, oh, maybe we should just throw the medal away.
And he threw it away.
Right.
So I bear with me here.
So years later today, he's very good at jujitsu and MMA.
And he won his first gold medal a few years ago.
He treasures that medal.
And I treasure that medal.
Cause I know how much effort went into that.
Years of toil and effort and failure went into that medal.
And I say all that to say for me, when you're, when you're a piece of art, particularly in a piece of art, like in the Leonardo days,
the struggle of the artist to create that with the tools they had in place is incredible.
And I think that's what you're valuing is the struggle.
And that's where this all came from.
For me is that if you deprive a child or a student, the journey of the struggle, they don't build that mental pathway, that neural pathway.
And that therefore the future of humanity is going to be making poor decisions if they can make decisions at all.
And it's that piece that I thought was so fascinating about your history, not just this book, but the echo into the past of all your other work and how that's all accumulated to give you this unique lens to comment on this.
All right, but there are a couple of comments and some will agree with you for throwing away the medal and some will not.
All right.
I didn't, by the way, I didn't throw the medal.
I, I may have hinted that it should be thrown away.
It doesn't matter whether it's physically was thrown away or not.
All right.
So one of the problems in the United States right now is great inflation.
So you have a child who's seven or eight years old, who's getting all A's.
Well, they shouldn't be getting grades at that age, but they are.
You have colleges and universities of the kind that I teach in, where the average grade once upon a time was a C.
You know, A is best and E is not so great at ever.
And the average grade at my university now is an A minus.
There's something wrong with this.
And this is typical across the United States.
So it's sending a weird kind of message to students that you're just doing well.
And then the reasons for the grade inflation that I won't go into at the moment, unless you want to.
Similarly, if you go to, um, and there's some kind of petition, you know, you're having an archery day or you're having a swimming, whatever.
And everybody gets a medal, a something.
I remember my son was in a camp and the phrase used by the athletics counselor at the end of the competition was, we're all winners at, and the name of the camp.
Now, interestingly, it was a music camp and they didn't do this for music.
So if you wanted to play in a solo recital, you had to work really hard and you had to get selected.
And there were different levels of orchestra.
And if you weren't that good, you were in the middle level orchestra.
And if you were really good, you had had to work at it.
Okay, there are, are ways of telling people we're all good.
And did my son think he was a winner?
No, he was sort of like your son and that he wasn't great in athletics then, but he has been to come since then, including in MMA.
Okay.
But then there's the question of, does everything that is creative require struggle?
I think of some of the things that I write and some of them are really hard and they're a struggle.
And I end up doing seven, eight, nine drafts before I'm even quasi happy with them.
And other times we've been writing the same sorts of things, why just sit down and write and, you know, I clean up the language and I get rid of repeated vocabulary words.
And I try to make it more friendly because for, you know, first time out of the gate, my writing tends to be very formal and I've come to write more informally over time.
But in terms of the idea and the structure, sometimes it just comes.
And that is true, I think you'll find with some other writers.
It's true of some painters.
In terms of, you know, take classical music and I'll talk specifically about classical.
You look at how much music Bach wrote, and I promise you, he didn't struggle over every piece.
He would have been long dead had that happened.
And you look at Mozart and Mozart died young, but he has a huge oeuvre.
OK, so was he a fantastic composer?
Yes.
Was there struggle in every piece?
No, they couldn't.
I mean, he had his own struggles.
He didn't have enough money.
He had kids.
He couldn't feed them, you know, and they had health issues.
But sometimes, you just do your thing.
So, do you have to learn at some point?
Surely.
Take Picasso for a moment.
Interestingly, when you look at Picasso's early work, and Picasso talked about this a little bit as well, it's very classically trained.
He learned how to do art, and then he decided, that's not how I want to do art.
And I suspect that a lot of his later works didn't take a fraction of the time that his earlier works did, because he had become himself.
OK.
But the new things that he was doing weren't using the techniques of the classical style that he had spent, I'm sure, years perfecting.
So, what does it mean to say it's the struggle for the newer Picasso?
I don't know.
He has since died, so we can't ask.
But I think it's a more nuanced story.
Developing a craft is critically important.
You're not going to get a gold medal in mixed martial arts unless you have trained your body.
And your body has changed, and it's become a new you, as it were.
But, you know, Grandma Moses did paintings, and she didn't have a whole lot of training.
And her paintings sell for a great deal, thank you.
So, it's a more complex story, I think.
And it's going to vary by individuals, and even for those individuals, it's going to vary by the time in their life, and whether they just feel, I can sit and write this piece.
I mean, I have written op-eds before, which means you get about 700 to 900 words, and rewritten it, rewritten it, rewritten it.
And then, sometimes, I'll just write it, read it twice, and send it off, and the editor says, gee, look.
Um, and the thing that I spent time on, uh, no.
I wanted to share this with you, because our guest on the show shared me this brilliant quote.
A guy called Peter Compo was on the show.
His book is here.
