Professor Goodman, you are here in Rome in the gallery of modern art and you are here taking
part at a conference on the image, the sign and the icon and it is I think the appropriate place
for interviewing you since very early in your life you have combined philosophical with art
interests. You have begun to study philosophy at Harvard University and when you were writing your
PhD you were at the same time having an art gallery and one can say that you are an exception in American
philosophy insofar as you are one of the few analytical philosophers who knows excellently
about the arts and the problems of aesthetic theory. You are a man who has broad knowledge
in the different arts and not only one but in the different forms of arts in music and painting
in literature and at the same time you are in difference of many other aesthetic
theories of the continental philosophy extremely well versed in logic and their
technical approach to philosophical problems which was conquered in our century by the analytical
philosophy. One of your first famous books is Fact, Fiction and Forecast about which we will speak in some
moments and in this book you gave very original contributions to the problem of induction. One speaks of a
Goodman paradox about which we will speak in some moments. Then your second major work was Languages of Art
in which you proposed a general theory of symbols on which ground you tried to develop a new approach to
aesthetic problems. In your later works, Ways of World Making for example and of Mind and Other Matters,
you develop more general consequences from these earlier approaches. You try to develop a new concept
of the world. You question whether there is something like a world and to develop an alternative epistemology
compared with that dominant in the philosophy influenced by analytical, by logical positivism. In your last book,
has a very significant title. It is called Reconceptions in Philosophy and Other Arts and Sciences and in this book,
written together with Katherine Elgin, you try to show, as it is already suggested by the title,
that philosophy is only one of the arts and sciences and that the classic and severe distinction between arts,
sciences and philosophy cannot be held up anymore. Let's begin now perhaps with your first interests,
with your contribution to the problem of induction. First of all, what is the problem of induction? Why is
there a problem? Let me just comment briefly on a couple of things you said. You said I made
important contributions to induction, the theory of induction. What I gave to the theory of induction and
the people who were working on it was just a lot of trouble, a very bad lot of trouble, and they've been
worrying about it ever since. Then, with respect to your later remarks here, you said it was my last book.
It was my, it is my latest book and I am resolved it shall be my last one. I'm tired of writing books.
It is not, it is true that I stress
the kinship between the sciences and the arts. It is not true, however, that I maintain that a
distinction between the sciences and the arts must go. Quite the contrary. What I am saying is that
most of the distinctions that have been drawn are wrong and that we have first to study
the likenesses between the sciences and the arts and then, in terms of further investigation,
examine what are the genuine and important differences between the two. So I just
correctly, very slight differences in what you said. What is the problem of induction? Well,
that in itself is a question. What do we mean by induction? Well, in induction we're drawing an
inference which doesn't follow from what's contained in the premises, I mean. The deductive inference you
have all men are animals and Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is an animal. In induction you are going
beyond the evidence trying to predict what happens in other cases, particularly in further, in later cases, but in any unexamined cases. And
the question is, can be put in two ways. The, in one form it asks, how do we know
that the world or whatever is going on the same way it always has? And the trouble with that question
is that it has a very simple answer that we don't know. We try to make inferences about the future and
so on, but there is no way in the world of guaranteeing it or saying that we are sure or know of it, no matter
what we do. Uh, well, where does this leave the problem of induction then? Well, what we have to do then
is to look and say, well, after all, what does it mean to say that the world goes on the way it has been?
What do it mean to say? And that is a very complex question and that's where we begin to get into these
paradoxes. Uh, will things go on as they always, always have? Well, this depends a lot on how we
say they've been going on. Uh, for example, does the, we, we point to the rising and setting of the sun
that's went on yesterday, the day before, centuries ago, and will it go on tomorrow and the next day?
And so on. Is this going on the way things always have? Well, yeah, but notice that we've built
a lot of irregularity into this, because after all, the sun rises in the morning, it sets at night,
and all day long it's varying. So how come that means that everything is going on as it always has?
So what we begin to notice here is that whether things go on the way they always have,
what this means is, or what this depends on, is what we take as the laws or principles that we formulate,
and going on the way things always have means, will they follow the same laws, the same principles,
as they did before? Well, it depends very heavily on how we formulate those laws. And here is where the
question came up, which led to my pointing out the difficulty that's raised by the so-called
pathological predicates. Some of the audience who are not philosophers may not even know what a predicate
is, but that doesn't matter. It's just another way of putting what I've just said about the differences
between the laws controlling whether the things go on the same way or not. And maybe I should stop there
for a second and let you comment on that or ask for further explanation there, and if not, then I can go on.
Well, a classical example for induction was all emeralds which we have seen till now are green,
so we suppose that they will be green also, if other emeralds we'll find will be green too. But you
showed in your book Fact, Fiction and Forecast, that it is certainly not so that the predicate green is
the only possible predicate which we can attribute to emeralds. We could also say that emeralds are
goo. What do you mean by goo? This is a simple case, you say what color are emeralds, what color are
emeralds are going to be, and you present some evidence, that is a few emeralds, and you look at
them and you say all of these emeralds are green. Now therefore I predict that other emeralds that are
coming in the future will be green. And so I have this kind of general principle set up that if A and B
and C and D, all these examined cases are green, then of emeralds are green, then every emerald is green.
Well this seems a very nice principle for induction until we begin to realize that this is calling
this continuity in terms of a very simple statement in terms of some habitual predicates like green.
Now suppose that I take the predicate you've mentioned, gru. What does gru mean? Well it means
that something is green if it's examined before say the year 2000, or it's blue if it isn't so examined.
So that an emerald, emeralds, all emeralds would be gru if everyone I examined up to 2000
is green and all those afterwards, or all those I didn't examine at all, were blue.
Now the problem is, you see, that if you have the evidence A, B, C, and D, the emeralds are examined,
are green, you also have the evidence that they grew. And so you don't, and you can't determine whether
they're green or grew by looking at them because it's the same process.
And so what you predict is going to depend heavily on the concepts, the predicates that you apply,
whether you say, well here's something gru or here's something green, and the evidence won't differ.
But if you say that they're green and you project, according to the principle,
all emeralds have been green or will be green, you get a very different result from if you apply the
other. And what this calls our attention to is the heavy contribution that our discourse,
whether in words or others, makes to what we call the world and the way we describe it.
There's no matter of fact here as to whether this emerald is green or gru. It's a question of how we
put it, so to speak.
Nevertheless, we'll come soon to this problem, which we have just named, how we make and construct the
world. Let me ask you some other questions regarding this problem. A common objection against
your pathological predicates is, well, green is more fundamental than gru, but you can show very
easily that in truth also gru can be introduced together with blin, which means blue till the moment
2000, and green after this moment, that gru and blin can be introduced as fundamental predicates.
And then by green, by the concepts of gru and blin, we can define the concepts of green and blue.
So that in this sense, we have no possibility of saying that the one couple of concepts is more
fundamental than the others.
Nevertheless, this illustrates what I said before, that whether things are going on the same as before
and that depends on how we describe them, depends on what we take as laws, and what we take as laws
involves the predicates, the concepts that we use in formulating those laws.
And so now, however, we invent these pathological predicates, and we point out this difficult
problem about induction. But of course, it doesn't mean that we're going to say, well,
it's equally good to apply gru as green, and the law, all minerals of gru is just as right as all
minerals of green. We don't mean that. Well, now, what distinguishes green as an appropriate predicate
here and gru as not? And why do we predict in terms of all things that are green rather than all things
that gru? Well, I think it's quite clear that it's a matter of accord with practice, you see, that what
establishes green as, so to speak, a good predicate here and gru as not, is that this is the way
we make inductions. This is a general principle which differentiates what we accept as valid
inductions from those which we accept as invalid. Well, if you say, well, that's, that accord with
practices doesn't seem, that isn't going to guarantee the things that are going on that way. No,
there is no guarantee. And it answers the second question. What do we mean by saying that the world
is going on the same way or not? We mean that it's going on the same way if we use these
so-called entrenched predicates that are adopted in practice to formulate our principles. Because
otherwise we could jiggle our laws around so that no matter what happened, things were going on in the
same way. The last question to induction. The most well-known attempt to solve the problem of induction
is Popper's falsificationism. Popper thinks that we can never be sure whether what a theory predicts
will be realized in future. But he thinks that we can falsify certain theories and then we must search
for a new one. Do you think that Popper's falsificationism avoids your problem with pathological
predicates? No, I don't think it does. He thinks it does, but I don't. But it's a little too complicated
question to go into here. Very good. So let's go now to the concept of world-making, which we have
already used several times. What do you exactly mean by world-making? An eighth interpretation of the
world would assume that there is a stable world, that we observe the stable world, and that when we
construct out of our observations, which should correspond to the objective world, a more or less
sophisticated theory, which mirrors this world. You don't agree with this interpretation of the world?
No, no. This is sort of a common view that if you ask someone what science is trying to do,
they'll usually say it's trying to give a true or right description of the world, you see. But what
does science come up with? It comes up with a good many theories, some of them such that they conflict,
and that if either is true, then the other is, which is a very strange situation. I mean,
the earth is in motion, the earth is at rest. Geocentric hypothesis and the heliocentric hypothesis
are equally true. You can't say that one is right and one is wrong. If one of them is good,
so is the other one. It's just a different way of describing things. So that how can there be
the world if there are all these, not only a multiplicity of true descriptions, but descriptions
that are at odds with one another? So there can't be any such thing as the world. Well,
shall we say then that there are many worlds? Well, this seems a little extravagant. And also,
it seems to me to, in a sense, multiply the error of supposing that the relationship between a
description of scientific theory is a relation of correspondence to something out there. So that
if you have many diverse descriptions which are right, then you must have something for them to
correspond to. I think that notion of correspondence is a very vicious one, which has to be dropped.
Where does that leave us if we can't say consistently there's such a thing as the world,
and we can't say, don't want to say that there are many different worlds? Well, the obvious answer is
that there is no such thing as the world. There are no worlds, you see. There are only the versions,
the descriptions. Uh, only we don't have to go quite that far and to say there is no such thing,
or there are no such things as worlds. And to say, it doesn't matter, we're not committed to there
being such things. Maybe there are, but it doesn't do us, make any difference to our theory or to our
decisions about it. So, uh, this means that a good many people have, well, people take two different
attitudes here. Uh, one is, well, uh, this means that philosophy and science, so to speak, are no longer
of any use. Uh, and they talk about the world being lost. Well, the world is a lot. Rorty writes about
the world well lost. And I think the world is, is well lost. But I don't think this means that
science loses its point, because the fact that there isn't the world, or there isn't just one
exclusive correct description, you see. Doesn't mean that there isn't a difference between right
ones and wrong ones. Uh, now, of course, the usual reaction to the layman, or the, an experienced
philosopher, is to this talk about, so I say that versions, which means descriptions or other,
other ways of portraying the world and other symbols, um, make worlds. There are many worlds
that are made by these versions, rather than the versions being made to agree with them. Well,
obviously, this is nonsense, what I'm saying, you see. And nobody accepts it. Everybody says that's
ridiculous. So, I try to give a few examples, uh, to show that it isn't so ridiculous. Uh,
and one, one of them is
the motion, description of motion that I've just mentioned. I mean, uh, is the earth at rest?
Is it moving? Is it moving this way, moving that way? There are a hundred different ways of
describing the motion. They can't all be about the same world. So, uh, what does the motion of the earth
depend on? If somebody says to me, we don't make the world, uh, obviously that's ridiculous. Just by
versions we make the world. Uh, I say, come now, tell me, what, what is the, what is the real case? I
mean, does the earth move or doesn't it? And, uh, what's my answer likely to be, or your answer? Well, it is
that, that depends, is what we're likely to say. Well, what does it depend on? Well, it depends,
for instance, on how I would plot it. All right, whether I take a pen and paper and I make a dot
and that's the earth and then the sun moves around, or I make a dot and that's the sun and the earth
moves around. So, look, uh, whether the earth moves and how it moves
depends on what I do here, how I plot. Well, I'm making the earth move or stop and if I can do that,
then the versions are doing something important. Take one more case. Uh, what about the constellations?
Who makes the constellations?
The great bear or the great dipper, whatever. Uh, did nature make the constellation? Well,
not really. Uh, you can say, nature made the stars, but it didn't make the constellation.
The constellations got made by being selected out of the whole total pattern in the heavens
and named constellations are given a name. And it's this very discrimination of these particular
ones from the others that gives any significance to the notion of a constellation. You can't just say
that every pattern of stars that might be drawn out is a constellation. That doesn't make any
distinction between constellations and anything else. Uh, well, you say, all right, but I said that,
did nature make the stars out of which the constellations are made? No, no, the situation is
much the same as with the constellations. Nature, if you say nature made the stars, but did it make them
stars? No, it didn't make them stars. We picked out certain conformations of particles and so on in the
heavens. And we select those and differentiate them by applying the term stars to those and not to
certain other things. So in answer to the protests that descriptions, versions can't make anything,
and say, well, look, they can make the earth move or stop and they can make constellations and they can
make stars. And that seems to me quite good evidence that they can make worlds. So
what's important now is not so much to argue these general issues, but to pay, this means we should pay
attention to ways of world making. We should pay attention to the devices and the means by which we
conduct science and by which we work in art. And instead of beginning by trying to distinguish art and
science, as I usually tell, one is dealing with fact and one with value, one is dealing with cognition,
the other with emotion and so on. We have to begin by noticing common characteristics
things of science and art. And the most basic one is that the instruments are both. They're all
presented in symbols, one kind or another. And it is then in terms of the symbols and the different kinds
of symbols and the different kinds of symbol functions that we may start if we want and discriminate
artistic ones from scientific ones from scientific ones. But the discrimination is not the primary
question. Yes, do you want to? May I ask a question before we go to this problem regarding your
conception of world making? One possible objection which one could make to you example with the earth
and the sun, what is in rest, what is moving, is the following. According to the Galilean mechanics,
it is clear that inertial systems are equivalent. It is not so that we can say of two inertial systems the
one is at rest and the other is moving or vice versa. But we must say within the theory that it is completely
indifferent whether one is at rest or the other is moving. So the more general theory which says that
all inertial systems are equivalent is the true one regarded to the others. But it has a higher claim of
objectivity compared with the isolated claims. And within the general theory of relativity not only
inertial but even accelerated systems are equivalent. But this claim that all accelerated systems are
equivalent is a universal claim. And it is not so that we can say that compared with the general theory of
relativity, the Galilean theory is another possibility to look at the world. The general theory is the
better. And what does it mean the better if not it comes nearer to the true reality of nature?
That's what it claims to mean, yes. I think there are other standards that have to be applied in this case
that there is a difference between a good or right theory and one that isn't. But I don't think this
traces back to agreement with nature. However, we're in danger now of getting into
highly technical discussions of relativity theory and so on. And I think maybe you ought to avoid that.
Okay, let's go back to your theory of symbols about which we were speaking just before. You think
that the concept of symbol is insofar a fundamental concept as it is more general than for example
scientific activity or artistic activity or philosophical thinking. All these activities are
symbolic activities. They use symbols by which we try to make worlds in different way. What is a symbol?
The central concept of your theory developed in languages of art? Well,
anything can be a symbol and can be a symbol at times and not a symbol at others. This comes to something
I'm going to say in just a minute. Symbol and the notion of symbolization or reference
symbols. General terms are more or less primitive in my system. And their explication comes not in
defining them in contrast to something else, but in specifying the kinds of symbols and the kinds of
reference, you see. This is the way it's true. Now, the general theory of symbols, you see,
well let me say this. If we recognize that science is a matter of making and not just reporting,
that then it begins to look a little more like art. Because obviously art involves a lot of invention.
And in a general theory of symbols, we need to consider not only words and language. Sometimes,
in contemporary philosophy, there's been an overemphasis on the linguistic and so on. As if
there were not hundreds of other kinds of symbols that are equally important. There are not only pictures,
models, diagrams, maps, and all the symbols in the various arts of dance and music and so on.
And all of these have to be recognized. And our general theory of symbols has to take them all into
account. Now, so this means that our philosophical activity needs to involve a good deal of study of
symbols and symbol systems. And then the question is, how do we distinguish between types? You see,
one of the important, one of the much discussed questions in philosophy has been, well, what's the
difference between a picture and a verbal description? And so too often, the easy but hopeless answer is,
well, the picture resembles what it refers to, whereas the verb, the words don't. I mean,
if you have a photograph, this looks like the person. And if you have a description of the person,
it doesn't. Well, this distinction cannot hold up. And I've given the argument at length.
So what is the difference? Well, it becomes a very difficult technical problem. And you have to
make a general study that goes into not only all the types of symbols that I've mentioned,
but into such things as notation, musical notation and dance notation. And how do these differ from
pictures? And how do they differ from diagrams? The question, what distinguishes a picture from
what isn't a picture, turns out to be enormously complex. And I think that we ought to begin with
noticing some more elementary aspects of the theory of symbol systems.
One of the things that we will have to find out, I'll simply comment briefly on this
matter of distinguishing between pictures and descriptions. And I think it turns out, as we look
at it harder, that there is no way of categorizing symbols as pictures and descriptions,
because the same symbol can function as a picture or as a description depending on the system of other
symbols in which it occurs. And this means that we have to pay attention to the characteristics of symbol
systems, as well as of individual systems. And I've once wrote about the question,
the standard question, the standard question, what is art? And concluded at the end of that,
that the question isn't what is art, but when is art? Because the same object, can it sometimes
function as a work of art and sometimes just as a utilitarian prospect. But one of the things I want to
point out further is that it's not only a matter of paying attention to symbols as such,
and of paying attention to symbols as they function in systems, but also to the different kinds of
symbol functions, different ways in which things may function as symbols. Now, we ordinarily think of
symbolizing or reference as being a matter of what I call denotation. That is, when I describe
something in words, or when I have a painting, a portrait of somebody, it applies to, it's a label for,
whether it's as a picture or words, label for something that it applies to. This is not the only kind of
symbol function. If you go into a store and you want to order something made of cloth, and they show you samples,
they show you little bits of samples. Well, this sample does not denote the cloth. It exemplifies it. It stands
for certain of its properties, not only certain of its properties, not its shape, but its color, and its weave,
and so on. And this is a very important kind of symbolizing, of reference, very important in art,
especially. And another important form of symbol functioning is expression, in which case the,
what is referred to is referred to metaphorically as when I say, the music is sad. Well, the music
isn't feeling sad, the music isn't weeping, but it's expressing the feeling of sadness. Here you see
this wiggly line. Now, what is it? Well, it could be a chart, a chart out of a paper showing stock market
prices, or showing temperatures for the day before, or any number of things. On the other hand, look at it
again, it could be a drawing of a mountain, such as a Japanese artist might do. Now, what's the difference
between these two functionings of the symbol? Well, it's not just denotation and exemplification,
it's something else. It's a matter of how much of the symbol, how many features of the symbol,
are functioning symbolically at all. Because as a diagram, all that counts is the distance of a
point above the base. Nothing else matters here. The color of the line doesn't matter, any variations,
and the shading don't matter. There's much that we just dismissed. On the other hand, if this were
a hocus-eye drawing, everything matters, to speak. The slight shading, differences in color, and so on.
And the distance above the base is only one of the factors. So here are a few samples of the kind of
topic that attention to the general theory of symbols leads us to study.
And these are not all, by any means, there are many more. But this project of having a general theory of
symbols which is applicable to the arts and the sciences means that we have to drop or dismiss or
replace some of the very fundamental concepts of philosophy. Because, for instance, consider truth.
Truth applies only to sentences and to declarative statements and words.
But now talk about visual design. Well, design can be right or wrong. But it's not true or false.
It doesn't have truth values. And so we need a more general concept of,
than truth, which we might call rightness, which has several functions. In the first place, even
in science and even in verbal description, truth is not the sole and all-inclusive goal. If the goal of
science was simply to get true descriptions, all you'd have to do is set all the calculators in the world
running and getting millions of sums. Two plus two is four, two plus three is one. All of these would be true.
We'd have millions of truths. But it wouldn't matter. If I ask you whether it's snowing outside and you
say two plus two is four, you've given a true answer, but it's not the right answer. It's not any good.
There are a lot of things involved here beyond truth, such as relevance and power of organization,
etc., which we can't go into. But this notion needs investigation.
It is certainly convincing that the traditional analytical philosophy ignored several very
important reals of the world, as for example, the aesthetic real. Nevertheless, a question which
I want to ask you is, do you believe that beyond truth, that there are some important categories
beyond truth, as for example, rightness, or as for example, beauty, but do you believe that these
categories are themselves in some way normatively structured? So that it is not possible to say
something is beautiful because it pleases persons, something is right because people do happen to
behave so, but that we still have the duty to search for normative criteria, which for example, in the
realm of art, allow us to say, this is a good work of art, and this is not a good work of art.
Well, rightness is to some extent expressed by saying it's good, or a good scientific theory, you see.
In fact, I would say that the notion of normative is such that all of these terms that I'm talking about,
truth is a normative function, and so is rightness.
And goodness and beauty?
Ah, yeah, but they're, they are specialized notions, and I'm not even sure that, in fact,
I'm sure that is not the case, that rightness in art can be identified with beauty,
because it seems to me ridiculous to call some of the greatest works of art
that beautiful or pleasant or anything of the sort. I mean, they're very harrowing very often.
And truth is not the only concept that needs to be revised or replaced.
Certainty, I mean, what is certainty? Is it a feeling of conviction? Or is it something that never can, I mean,
if you start analyzing the notion of certainty, you see it's utterly unacceptable, it has to drop out,
something else has to replace it. And even knowledge, because knowledge means
certainty of truth apparently. And therefore that's an incomprehensible notion. I think we have to replace
knowledge by understanding. And whereas philosophy and its traditional function is often thought of as
starting from elementary certain truths that are absolutely certain, and then deriving a lot of others
that are equally certain. And I think that's a misconception. I think that now we have to
regard philosophy as the investigation of understanding, not of establishing truths, but of grasping and
of organizing things and of gaining insights by perceiving important distinctions and relations,
as we can do if we have a general theory of symbols to work with.
There is an important convergence between what you are just now saying and the traditional continental
hermeneutical philosophy, since hermeneutical philosophy has its aim to understand understanding,
to try to develop a theory which, as you were just saying, is more general than only a theory of knowledge,
since we can understand a theory without knowing whether it is true or false. For example,
in Heidegger's Being and Time we have such a more general theory of understanding which he thinks
should be the base of any concrete epistemological analysis of concepts like truth and falsehood and so on.
Would you also see a convergence between this post-analytical American philosophy
represented by a person like you and the traditional hermeneutic philosophy in Europe?
I rather resist that. Why? Well, my whole orientation where I come to this problem is quite different,
I think. And furthermore, I think that none of these people has adequately paid attention to
all the forms of symbols, you see, to the symbols and the symbolization that enters into the understanding
that we get from art and all the arts and so on. And my whole orientation is different. My own
orientation comes rather from people like Katsira and so that would be nice. Now so you see,
what I've been saying is that we may start from this naive notion that there is the world and what
we try to do is to describe it correctly and to picture it correctly, to realizing that there are many
different and conflicting ones and therefore there can't be the exclusive ones. And that therefore,
what we have to do is to discover, is to examine the various, what I call various versions and visions.
And that is to develop a general theory of symbols that
the notes, these different symbol functions. And then deal with the specific problems that arise here.
And of course, what arises are generally
questions of a different sort from those we've been asking.
And we'll have to stop for a second, I guess, here, and then move pretty nearly through.
I can ask you a question about the different arts, the different specific way of symbolizing in the
different arts. And the question, then we can also lead to the concept of, to the problem where
there are some general concepts of aesthetics as variation, for example, and then we could also then
use your work. So we could, differences and moments of identities in the different arts.
Yes. Well, of course, there are enormous differences. If you just consider, for instance, painting and
architecture and music and dance, you see. Then the limitation of aesthetic questions to the old
other questions, what is real representation, what is perspective and so forth and so on. These diminish
in relation to the whole collection of new and interesting questions, such as, for instance,
the notion of variation in music and in painting. And I guess what I'd better do there is to have a little
additional tape that you can... Very good.
One of the consequences of this is that if you're going to broaden your scope and if you're going to
take in the arts and sciences and all kinds of symbols and symbol functions,
that then you are going to need other concepts to be broadened. For instance, we speak of conflict
between statements or descriptions. Well, this is easily defined. We have the notion of contradiction
and of being contraries. But when we speak of two pictorial representations,
what does conflict mean here? It doesn't mean that
if one's true, the other isn't, because truth doesn't apply here. But what does conflict mean? And
others are there special kinds of conflict, just as there are special kinds of contrariety and logic.
And so this involves a whole new task of construction, working out these things. I mean, we have to
have a more general notion of opposition, let's say, with all these things. And the result of
the world being lost, and the result of this approach of giving up the idea that there is something
that you have to describe and so on, and studying the variety of versions and how they function,
is not that we give up, as some people have said, and Rorty, I think, says, well, because of all this
diversity and this conflict and so on, we better abandon philosophy and just conduct conversation.
I mean, my conclusion is exactly the opposite, that what we see is a whole vast region of
new problems that we have to work very hard on, that the future of philosophy is involved in
constructionalism of a new kind. We have to reconstruct from this sort of stereotyped and
a dead mess that we're moving out of. It may seem that these funny words printed in the wrong color,
so to speak, illustrate a purely academic invention of philosophers and faculty.
But there is an interesting application of this. There is a painting by the American artist,
Jasper Johns. It's a big painting, and it has various patches all over it, in which color patches
and color words are, so to speak, in the wrong colors, just as these are. In other words,
it's kind of application of this. This painting by Jasper Johns is a very famous living artist.
And this painting, in which he uses this device,
sold recently in New York at auction for 17 million dollars. Unfortunately, the philosophical
recognition of this is not worth that much. And unfortunately, he painted that picture in 1959,
whereas I only wrote about this device in 1968. An interesting illustration of the investigation of
the notion of a variation occurs in the paintings of Picasso. He painted some 45 paintings, which are
variations on Velázquez's famous painting, Las Meninas. And I will show you now a painting, a detail of the Las Meninas
picture, and then I will show you some of Picasso's variations on that part of the picture.
The first picture here is a detail is just the left hand maid of honor. The picture is of the royal family,
the two maids of honor surrounding the little princess. The left hand maid of honor is being very servile,
she's handing the princess tray, and so on, in the Velázquez picture. Picasso sees something else here.
In the first Picasso variation, she has become a rather fierce person. The hands are very large.
In the second one, she's even wilder and grasping out, and so on. And in the third one here,
she's become really a dominating characteristic taking possession of the princess. Now,
in case that we want to use it, I'll do another one. This slide is the detail in the center of the picture
of the little princess, who is surrounded by these two, or flanked by these two maids of honor. And
Picasso interprets them in his own way. I've just showed you how he interprets one of them, as the
one who's outwardly servile, but is really grasping. And here we have Velázquez's princess,
and then a variation by Picasso on it, in which she's obviously not just a pretty princess enjoying life,
but is in some distress, contrasting colors and an intense expression. One second.
The conflict and pain intensify in this compelling and penetrating portrait.
Then in the next variation on that same
subject, the color is gone, and you have a very distorted face by Picasso,
in which it seems that the emotion has become so intense that it's sort of drained and left a very
tortured person here. The little princess in the court is under the domination here, it seems,
in Picasso's interpretation of the two maids of honor. And then, in a third variation,
you see something much more like a realistic portrait of the princess. But, as you look at it,
with black eyes and all that, you see it's a very, it's the remains of what is there after all this agony.
And she's come to a, the place of being able to tolerate it, but the torment is covered with courage,
but the eyes and mouth reveal what lies underneath. Well, these variations by Picasso and Lathmaninus,
I think are fascinating. And it's also possible to have music which accompanies the development of these.
