Hey, everyone.
It's me back again with another iPhone-based video, which
at this point may just become a regular feature
of the channel, especially for the time being,
because it appears we're basically
on a minute-to-minute news cycle with political and economic
news, which given the usual production schedule of our channel
and the content we make is just really difficult to respond to
without resorting to filming myself on my iPhone
in my living room.
So again, apologies for the lower audiovisual quality.
But once again, we need to have a conversation.
If you missed it, I made a video late last week
talking about the current political chaos
we find ourselves in with the beginning of Trump's second term.
That video happened to be motivated particularly
by the spending freeze, which was being threatened.
It appears, at least for the time being,
it's somewhat on the back burner or kind of politically
untenable right now.
Who knows, this may make a surprise appearance slightly
later on in this administration.
But for the time being, we've moved on to other fresh horrors,
such as the trade wars we're kicking off with some of our closest allies.
You know, apologies Canada, for example.
I know you guys are once again sort of hitched to the bumper of the pickup truck
that is America careening around the side of a mountain now driven by an absolute madman.
If it's any consolation, which I'm sure it isn't,
many of us are just as distressed as you guys are and did not vote for this.
But whatever, it doesn't matter.
As Americans, it's our responsibility to do something.
So in that video, I talked about kind of the situation we're in, how we got here,
the fact that this did not start and end with Trump, and kind of what to do next.
I won't bore you guys by repeating the video.
It's linked in the description if you want to watch it.
But it did get a pretty substantial response and a ton of comments.
And notably, one of the themes in the comments, and this is also something
I've been getting a lot on social media, people have been emailing, etc.,
is some version of why should I bother saving, investing, planning for retirement,
any of these financial things if the world is just burning.
And I know that they're referring to both literally in terms of climate change,
which is increasingly just like a feature of our lives and will only become more so as time passes.
But I know they're also talking about the political and economic upheaval that is almost
guaranteed to occur over the next four years and beyond and what the consequences of that will be.
I want to answer this question in two parts, essentially, because one part is the
why participate in the system if it's so bad, which I think is a huge part of this question.
And the other part is why should I participate in it?
What if the stock market goes to zero or we're all living in some Mad Max scenario?
Because I think both of these are valid questions and deserve to be taken seriously.
Now, I do want to be clear that this sort of question framing of, you know,
why should I bother doing anything financial if the world is just chaos and or going to be even more
so is a question that we have received pretty much since we started this channel.
And that is just another reminder that all of this does not start and end with Trump.
And both the sort of existential dread and the ethical complications of participating in our
financial system is not new, was an issue under Biden, would have been an issue under Harris.
So we need to just acknowledge that first and foremost, although obviously right now
it is ramped up to 11, no denying that. That being said, I do want to acknowledge that as we addressed
in the previous video, a lot of what is happening under the Trump administration is an out and out
war on the poor and an attempt to increase wealth inequality and to further concentrate wealth and
power at the very top. So I do think even if these questions have been a recurring theme in America,
especially since Reagan, I definitely think they have gotten worse now. And I understand why.
And I share those anxieties, right? I think about them all the time. I just watch like a 90 minute
conversation between Chris Hayes and Ezra Klein to somewhat self-soothe. So we know things are dire
in this house. But this question of the world is burning, so why should I care is one that I really
do want to take seriously because I feel like it just really never gets taken seriously from either
side, especially in the financial media ecosystem. Because on the financial media side and sort of the
financial world generally, I'm not going to name names. I think a lot of you probably know
who I'm talking about. But some of the biggest players, many of the loudest voices in the financial
space are somewhere between neoconservative and flat out libertarian. So for them,
everything that's happening, whether it's the tariffs or the increased deregulation or cutting taxes for
the rich and corporations and either increasing or maintaining them for the lower and middle classes,
like all of those things fall somewhere on the spectrum between it's not happening, it's not a
problem, and it's actually a good thing. And that includes climate change too. Like I highly doubt
many of these guys, and they're all basically guys, are that concerned about climate change if they're
even convinced it's a reality. But suffice to say, any of the very real sort of future concerns or
ethical considerations that come into play when it comes to existing in our financial system, they
don't give a shit. They just simply don't. Or again, they think it's a good thing. So that's the
one side that you encounter when you ask this question. The other side is sort of the left progressive
ecosystem, which as someone who watches a lot of YouTube and primarily watches left progressive
content, like one of the frustrations I often find with that media ecosystem, aside from the fact that
they can't stop fighting with each other like a bunch of real housewives, they're always going at
each other's throats, is the fact that I think they don't treat the reality of existing within our
current flawed, broken financial system with a proper level of pragmatism and practicality. Because I
think a lot of what progressives will point out, especially in the sort of political space, what they'll point
out about our financial system, that it's extremely ethically compromised, that in many ways it's
contributing to climate change, that it's basically impossible to invest without your money going to
at least some things you almost certainly don't agree with, that labor is being eroded to the point
that retirement won't even be possible for a huge portion of the population, that wealth inequality is
reaching these unstable levels. Like all of that is true. All of that is true. But if the answer to that
is, so you shouldn't participate in it, so you should not invest, so you should not plan for
retirement, so you should not save money, so you should just divest quote unquote in whatever vague
way that means, the practical outcome of that is leaving people, individuals, usually people who are
not very wealthy to begin with, in a much worse financial situation. And one thing I feel like we
cannot say enough on this channel as people who do advocate for financial solvency and literacy
instability is keeping yourself broke or financially unstable, if you have the option to make yourself
financially stable, literally does A, nothing to help you, and B, nothing to help any of the social
or political causes you care about, because nine times out of ten being in financial chaos leaves you
with the ability to do literally nothing except survive day to day. And I think we don't understand that
when we talk about something like retirement, for example, what it means to not be in financial chaos
for the average person is hundreds of thousands, if not well over a million dollars saved. Because
whether it is through the inability to work physically or just the desire to not work, even a decade or so
of living without any other income, that requires a lot of money. Social Security already doesn't cover it.
That problem is going to get way worse by the time my generation is approaching retirement. So if we do not
take our financial situation seriously, we are essentially guaranteeing ourselves that either now
or at some point in our life, we will have the ability to focus on nothing but survival, which is, by the
way, a very, very intentional dynamic. When we talk about the war on the poor, for example, it's so important
to remind ourselves that keeping people disenfranchised and disorganized is the exact strategy taken by the
capital-wielding class to keep the labor force cheap. A group of people who have no time or
ability to focus on anything but their own survival, who are having to work multiple jobs just to get by
every day, they don't have time to organize. They don't have time to advocate for themselves. They don't
have time to contribute to their own communities or to broader political causes. They also don't have the
leverage to look for other better compensated jobs. So keeping people poor and desperate only plays into the
dynamic that we're already seeing, which is just less and less leverage on the side of people without
money and more and more leverage on the side of people with it. Many people do not have the choice
in their lives to ever escape that dynamic. Poverty is called a cycle for a reason. So if you do have
the opportunity to invest, to save, to make sure that you are financially stable now and in the future,
to not do that helps no one, least of all yourself. But once we've agreed, and I don't know that we'll all
agree, but I believe, and I think a lot of us believe, that keeping yourself broke helps no one,
then we can sort of dismiss this very sort of broad stroke opinion of like, well the system is
terrible so you shouldn't participate in it. Now I very cynically believe that a lot of the loudest
voices on the quote unquote left who advocate for that are people who, whether through generational
wealth or otherwise, simply don't have to worry about it in the same way that other people do. Like
for example, if you have a safety net in your family where you will always have somewhere to live,
you will always have your needs met. You will always be able to survive no matter what happens.
Like you're already in a vastly different position than many other people who have much, much less
of an ability to just unplug themselves from the system. But I also think that thinking this way,
the system is bad so you shouldn't participate in it, even if it means your own suffering.
I think that leads us to the completely philosophically dead end of no ethical consumption
under capitalism, which we'll get into in a second. Because essentially that just justifies any and all
choices under the guise of the fact that they're all bad, so why not just make the ones you want?
And I know that not everyone uses it this way, but I see every day being a financial creator.
I see every day some of the most extreme acts of reckless consumerism being committed under the
banner of, well, they're all bad, so what does it matter anyway? I believe, and I think the only
rational way forward is that yes, the system is bad. That doesn't mean that abstaining from it entirely is
either possible, let's start there, or advisable for 99% of people. And it's also worth noting that
part of shoring yourself up financially and creating basic financial stability is so you are able to
make those better choices. For example, when it comes to something like consumerism and the no ethical
consumption under capitalism, you are certainly able to make much more informed and ethical consumer
decisions to buy from companies with better labor practices, with better production standards, if you
have more money because nine times out of 10, those products are much more expensive. But so once we
acknowledge that, yes, the system is imperfect, that doesn't mean you need to screw yourself over. I
think we need to move to the second part of this, and I think the animating belief behind a lot of these
questions, which is what should we do? Why should we invest if, for example, the stock market is just going
to go to zero one day, or the banks will collapse, or any of these other extreme scenarios? So let's start by
talking about investing because that's something we talk about all the time here at TFD, and it is very
much linked up to your retirement. And it's something that we advocate for. You'll see us all the time
advertising an app called Betterment. They're great. Use whatever one you want. Just say, point being,
get into investing. And we say that because for the vast majority of people, it is impossible to build up
enough wealth to take yourself through retirement comfortably without participating in the stock market.
That's what a 401k is. That's what an index fund is. All of these investment
vehicles, by necessity, are tying you up with the stock market. And I want to say on the ethical
front, yes, it is basically impossible to have a properly diversified portfolio and not be investing
to some extent in some things that you don't agree with. I will link you in the description to my
friend Amanda Holden, dumpster doggy. She's an investing expert, and she does have great explainers
on how to reduce the negative impacts of your investing portfolio while still investing. She's one of the
most politically engaged women I know, very much down for the cause. She still not only invests,
but it educates other women on how to do it. So let's start there.
But when we talk about, well, what happens if the stock market goes to zero?
We have over 150 years of stock market data. We have gone through the Great Depression,
two world wars, the 70s economic crisis, the Cold War, the 2008 crash, countless other social,
political, economic upheavals. And we still have not only all of the data that we can look back at at the
stock market, but a very well-established record of the fact that over a long enough period of time,
it is the single best vehicle for wealth creation for essentially all classes of Americans.
And especially if you're looking to outpace inflation, one of the only ways that we can
guarantee something like a dignified retirement. Like it or not, we are in a situation where social
security is insufficient and most people do not have pensions. In order to get to those numbers we
talked about earlier and to not be essentially having to drive for Uber Eats until you are
literally dead, which is the case for many senior Americans right now, you are going to have to
participate in this system. And if you don't, it is going to be drastically more difficult for you to
save enough money. But if we take these sort of doomsday scenarios of what happens if the stock
market goes to zero, what happens if all my wealth evaporates? I want to take that seriously and
say it is not impossible that that could happen. I mean, literally anything's possible.
You know, a meteor could strike the earth and kill us all tomorrow. Like anything's possible, right?
I won't say it isn't. Much crazier things have happened throughout all of the earth's history.
I will say it's extremely unlikely though. And what I will say more importantly is that
long-term financial planning and wealth building are about playing the odds. They're about playing
the averages, about making decisions based on what is likely to happen. What is the most established,
safe bet based on historical data? And again, looking back on that 150 plus years of historical
data we have, we can see that the market returns of long-term investing in the stock market
are the most sure, safe, secure bet to accumulating the kind of wealth that you will need in order
to do things like retire and again, especially beat inflation. And it's also worth noting that not
just an enormous amount of global capital, but the wealthiest and most powerful people in the world
are inextricably tied up with the continued success of that market and the reliability of it.
So if we are in a scenario where that all goes to zero, I think we need to understand just how
different the world that we will be living in will be. It's also very fair to say that if we are in
that scenario where the stock market all completely crashes and goes to zero and all of that wealth is
erased, that we will have many other problems, economic and otherwise, that will likely greatly
eclipse the fact that our portfolio is at zero. At some level, we need to be able to separate out
our rational, calm financial planning from the very real and justified financial, ethical,
even philosophical anxiety that we might feel at any given time. This can be very, very difficult for a
lot of us to do. For the record, I work with a financial advisor. You'll also probably see us on the channel
a lot. Promoting a financial advisor, service advisor. We love them. You don't like them. Work
with someone else. But in general, getting someone who can help you through these times if you can
afford it is also very helpful. But those of us who aren't navigating this with someone who have to
wake up every day and read the terrifying, scary, overwhelming, difficult to understand news,
and then try to make good financial decisions, we have to be able to separate those two things out.
My friend Erin Lowry aka Broke Millennial, she is a great financial creator. We're actually doing an
advice series later this month. But she actually talked about in her investing book, one of the
experts that she interviewed literally did not open her portfolio statements for the essentially
entire year plus after the 2008 crash because she didn't want to see those scary numbers and make a
rash decision. Because as we've talked about many times on this channel, one rash decision of pulling a
bunch of money out or reallocating everything in a panic can ruin decades of good consistent
investing. But even if it's just something as simple as when you're buying a home or how much you're
keeping in an emergency fund or what your career plans are, all of these things, they need to be made as
measured, thoughtful, calm decisions that are based on pragmatism and based on what is most likely to
happen. This is not to say that the most catastrophic things will not come to pass. They very well might.
We don't know. But we have to play the odds. We have to base our decisions on what is most likely to
happen. And my best advice for people who have the ability to achieve financial stability but are also
concerned about the ethical implications of living and working within our economic system,
get your oxygen mask on and then take all of that enormous economic privilege of not having to worry about
your survival and dedicate it to any number of causes, political, social or otherwise, that you
deem worthy, that you think are important. That could be mutual aid. That could be running for office.
That could be basically anything you want it to be. But you will have the ability to do it because you
won't be worried about making rent at the end of every month. You won't be worried about never being
able to retire. You won't be worried about potentially being homeless if anything goes wrong because you have
an emergency fund. And just like with the no ethical consumption stuff where you can basically justify
anything because it's all problematic or compromised, the truth can always be somewhere in the middle,
right? Like you can choose not to shop at fast fashion and still, for example, have an iPhone.
And yes, both of those are problematic products in their own ways. But you can still make better
choices within a flawed system. Because these extremely black and white proclamations of it's all
bad, so divest, or the sky is falling, so why bother, or no ethical consumption under capitalism, all they do
is lead us to a place where nothing matters. It leads us to a place of total nihilism and total
hopelessness. The truth is that change is possible, but we can only make that change when we're not
fighting on a day-to-day basis to survive. So if you have the ability to ensure your survival,
ensure it. Is it going to be ethically imperfect? Yes. But so is living in America. We don't have the luxury of
uncompromised choices. So yes, be worried. Yes, be plugged in. Yes, be thoughtful. But don't get so
woke that you torpedo your own financial stability to prove something, because all it will hurt is you.
That's all. I'll see you guys here soon. Bye.
