If you're interested in consciousness, if you're interested in philosophy minds, why not explore that whole amazing cosmos of different forms of experience, forms of experience which, you know, you can't really explain.
If certain psychedelic induced mystical experiences are ineffable, if you can't put them into words and you can't report them, then you can't get a neural correlate to them either.
Let's say that you did further tests to determine whether certain psychedelics decreased brain activity whilst the report was of intense, rich experience, ordered experience.
That would be a fascinating finding, wouldn't it?
That would actually be a way of empirically getting into metaphysics.
And it's psychedelics that would allow for such tests because it temporarily changes the functioning of normal prosaic brain functioning.
So, yeah, there's a lot of interesting things yet to discover.
Peter, if you had to give me a philosophical history of the mind-body problem, what would you tell me?
What story would you craft and which historical figures come to mind when you think of the story?
Well, I suppose a traditional story that Schopenhauer tells is from Descartes.
I mean, Descartes seems to think that, you know, with him, the whole problem about essentially upward causation, downward causation begins in their interaction.
But, of course, you know, in the West we see notions of the mind, of course, in the classic philosophers, Plato, Aristotle, of course, you know, with regard to, you know, the soul, the forms, teleology, whatnot.
What story would I tell?
Well, I still like to tell the Cartesian story, to be honest, because I think that because I quite I take quite radical views of the mind, I would maybe less radical these days.
But I like to always go into the sort of modern history as to why people think that's radical, why they think it's strange and whatever.
So I like to go, yeah, take that Cartesian route of the classic Cartesian dualism.
But then I also like the history of idealism, you know, which is kind of lost, I think, to a certain extent, especially British idealism or absolute idealism.
I was just reading a text on it the other day, and it said that for many reasons, but partly because of the war, the Great War, there was a big antagonism towards against Germany and against nationalism.
And as a result, that kind of German based idealism, which became heavily prominent in Britain, was kind of was kind of left alone.
So you get this history of philosophy from Mill to Russell and you skip like 50 years in the late sort of 19th, early 20th century.
So I always like to go through that British idealism basically came out of Hegel mostly, you know, starting with with Green ending with FH Bradley.
And then, you know, from FH Bradley's appearance in reality, 1893, as a kind of advance of that, you get Whitehead's philosophy, Alfred North Whitehead's philosophy.
I mean, he called his main book Process and Reality because it came out of, you know, based on Bradley's appearance in reality.
It was seen as a sort of realist advance on that idealism, although Bradley himself didn't know whether he was a realist or idealist.
But anyway, so to understand Whitehead, it's good to look at, you know, to understand Bradley, really.
And to understand Bradley, you know, you go through the British idealist, absolute idealist, and then you realize, well, you've really got to know Hegel a bit.
And then if you do understand Hegel, Kant, Kant, Leibnitz, Wolf, and so on.
And then you go back to where it all began, essentially, with the ancient Greeks.
So, yeah, but my own particular interests, I would say, at the moment, at least, lie around that kind of lost history of absolute idealism, which is kind of predominant philosophy in the English-speaking world for 50 years.
I'm glad you brought up idealism, because when I read your work and when I explore it, a big part of me thought about why you're not an idealist instead of a panpsychist.
So, do you want to touch on that?
Sure.
Funnily enough, I'm currently writing a review of Bernardo Castrop's Analytic Idealism, his latest book, you know, so we can go into that if you want later.
But why, first of all, I would say that panpsychism and idealism are not mutually exclusive.
So, you get, for example, in Leibnitz both, I would say, you know, and perhaps in Whitehead.
He's, you know, it depends how you define idealism.
And I should say that I was, I did count myself amongst the idealists years ago.
So, first of all, getting introduced to Kant, Manuel Kant, first critique at university, it sort of blew my mind.
And, you know, because of something quite rational, quite reasonable, still influential today, of course, even in modern theories of predictive processing, whatever, you can sort of trace that back to Kant to a certain extent.
But, but, but then Schopenhauer took hold of me, because it's sort of an advance upon Kant in a way that will was actually something that was, it was the thing in itself that you could know within yourself, at least that seemed in advance.
And, and Nietzsche coming out of Schopenhauer kind of changed my ethical views quite radically.
Yeah, but, but then I also studied Bergson at Warwick University, with Keith Ansell Pearson.
I did Hegel with Stephen Holgate.
So, I got into all of that.
I had a good mix, really.
And, but after university, you know, I especially went into Alfred North Whitehead's thought, as I said, because it seems like the kind of culmination of a lot of this idealism.
I mean, I could go into it.
I mean, the, the great thing about Whitehead is, you know, that Kant's whole so-called Copernican revolution was due to, partly due to Hume on causation, saying we can never directly perceive causation.
Whitehead's, Whitehead argued that actually you can directly perceive causation, and that's the same thing as perception, apprehension for him, and same thing as memory.
And he brought it all together in this very parsimonious way.
But, as a result, it made Kant's critical philosophy superfluous, you know, because it was, it was sort of a reaction to something that Hume got wrong.
Anyway, you know, one keeps reading, and I'm sure my views will change as time goes on.
Well, I guess I might have jumped the gun a bit.
Let's, let's start off by defining consciousness.
So, before, so before we continue into your actual views and how it differs from your typical pan-psychist view or idealist view, how would you define consciousness?
Well, I, I always approach this question in a tripartite fashion.
So, you can see I've been asked this before.
I teach philosophy of mind today.
Yeah.
So, I, I, my, my general answer is, um, the approach to take, which I find the most useful, is to divide it into three parts.
Um, the first part is to ask what contents of consciousness are.
So, that would include, you know, um, colors, sound, sense, uh, emotions, feelings, will, um, time rates, time flows, stuff like that.
Um, qualia, it's controversial words, but I think as a generic term, it's fine.
Um, so that's the first thing, you know, sort of, uh, one can talk about these different types of consciousness.
Absolutely.
Second, uh, part of the answer is, um, to talk about the differentiators of consciousness from non-consciousness, generally matter, but that's, what is matter is just as difficult, right?
So, um, that would be things like, but these are all, you know, like, more, um, purported differentiators.
So, like, privacy, for example, or, um, non-spatiality with Descartes, or non-inferentiality, or, you know, and so on and so forth.
All these sort of, uh, you know, like, purported things that make mind, teleology, you know, things that make mind different from, uh, matter.
But all of those are questionable, right?
So in answering the question, what is consciousness, you, you, you have to put forward all these questionable theories, right?
Some of them probably right, some probably wrong.
And then the third, um, part of the answer to the question, what is consciousness, is the relations of consciousness to non-consciousness.
So then you get into the isms, you know, so then, you know, dualism, uh, different times, physicalism, emergentism, epiphenomenalism, um, idealism.
Um, absolute monism, you know, the transcendent, even, uh, and so on and so forth.
All of which, uh, as you know, in fact, the purpose of this podcast, um, highly debatable.
So, you know, yeah, so I think basically to answer the question, what is consciousness, you just have to go through, um, a whole array of questionable theories, um, to even begin.
So I don't think there's any sort of absolute answer to that.
I was speaking to Stuart Hameroff about this, about, I think it was a week ago, and he was talking about how in 1994, when David Chalmers mentioned the heart problem, that their intention was to spend the entire weekend, the first day was to define consciousness, but they spent the entire weekend then stuck on the definition.
So it seems like this is really a problematic aspect of trying to discuss consciousness.
What are your thoughts?
Yeah, um, well, I mean, you know, it's, I think, philosophy of mind really is concerned with, um, that question and the third part of the answer, you know, the different, different, um, sort of relationships.
Although of course it's been focused really on physicalism and dualism in the 20th century, I think that's changing a bit now, but yeah, no, it's no easy option.
And if you're an idealist, of course, or a certain type of idealist, Hegelian maybe, um, then consciousness is same thing as reality anyway.
So, uh, you know, and to us, what is reality?
It's, uh, you know, deepest, most fundamental of all questions.
So I don't know the answer to these.
You've got a nice grasp of the history of philosophy of mind.
Uh, I noticed when you talk about it, when you write about it, you, you really have studied this very well and you articulate your answers very well as well.
And it's enjoyable to listen to it.
What do you think is the reason for this current shift from most materialist, physicalist theories of consciousness, slowly transitioning into this panpsychist or idealist framework?
Why do you think this is happening?
I mean, it's, I think multifaceted reasonings as always, you know, um, there's no, there is no, there is no, no questions here.
It's just, yeah, well, uh, yes.
Um, well, I think, I think, um, you know, on a surface level, uh, David Chalmers and yeah, talking about, you know, renaming an old problem, mind, body, body problem, um, high problem, consciousness just brought to light the fact that, uh, nothing was really satisfactory.
None of this sort of general answers are satisfactory of the 20th century, at least.
Um, so because of that, you know, sort of cul-de-sac with the hard problem, um, people went back to the drawing board as well and looked to the past for, um, possible ways of approaching this question.
And that's, I think why, for example, panpsychism came back into, onto, onto, onto the book table because, um, you know, this has got a great pedigree.
Um, RG Collingwood, you know, in the idea of nature, um, he writes that, you know, the ancient Greeks, um, thought that the whole of nature was alive.
That was their metaphor for reality, you know, uh, an organism.
Um, and then we sort of moved into the metaphor of the machine.
And then he said, we're now moving into the metaphor of history with evolution and so on.
Um, but, um, but I think that, uh, yeah, no, so, so we've got, there's a great pedigree in panpsychism with the Greeks, um, with Renaissance thinkers.
I mean, it was Patrice, the Renaissance thinker who coined panpsychism.
Interestingly, if you read that though, it means what we today probably define more as pantheism.
So the meaning's changed.
Um, and, you know, as a, as a kind of semi whiteheadian, uh, we prefer the word pan experientialism, but I just see that as a time.
Um, but I just see that as a type of panpsychism really, um, um, yeah.
So that's so, so yeah.
And then there's great thinkers who are panpsychist, you know, like I mentioned a few already, Leibniz, Spinoza, um, Russell, arguably whitehead then, um, and many others in the contemporary world, Galen Strawson, you know, and so on.
Um, yeah, go on.
No, no, no.
So that's one reason.
I mean, so, so yeah, like, you know, we've come to color sack, uh, this great pedigree of panpsychist thinkers.
So people are, um, approaching, um, panpsychism again, that's on the sort of logical surface level.
I think there are deeper, not deeper, but other socio economic political factors as well.
So, um, you know, relating to the church and the, you know, the sort of battle between the sort of, um, the middle classes, the bourgeois and the clergy and so on.
And sort of, uh, yeah, this and that.
And I mean, yeah, multifaceted and it's pretty impossible to prove anything, you know, it's so multifactorial.
It's very hard to pin down certain reasons.
Cause I do believe if, if Nixon hadn't with Timothy Leary, if all of that hadn't happened, I believe that panpsychists or idealists would be, I think it would be more of a thriving philosophy at this point.
Well, yeah, well, it's interesting.
I think it's multifactorial.
So I do know that it's not a single entity.
No, no, no, absolutely.
Um, yeah.
I, I mean, I think if the war didn't happen, um, things would be extremely different for sure.
Um, Timothy Leary and the whole sort of psychedelic sixties outburst.
I mean, you know, like the pit, the, the great pity about that was that, um, there were intellectuals looking at psychedelic consciousness, you know, like Humphrey
Osmond, who'd coined psychedelic and hallucinogen and Aldous Huxley.
And, uh, you know, they, they do organize this, this great gathering in the fifties in the 1950s called outside where they invited Einstein and Jung and AJ and, you know, um, and so on.
Was that AJR?
Anyway, some great thinkers together to take mescaline and then write about it.
You know, that was 1950s.
They almost got it all together, all the fun, you know, promised funding from the Ford Foundation.
But in the end, Ford Foundation pulled the plug and didn't go ahead.
You know, some 10 years later, then Timothy Leary messes it all up.
Um, so yeah, I think, you know, psychedelic research would have, um, steamed ahead had it not been for that.
I don't just blame Leary, of course.
I mean, it was the, it was the, uh, political situation that also suppressed it.
I mean, again, um, interesting histories there, but this goes back, I should say just quickly.
Uh, it also relates to the, you know, um, colonization of the Americas when the sort of Iberians, um, um, prohibited psychedelic drugs, you know, when they came across them in South America, middle America.
And, um, also related to the American temperance movement against alcohol, you know, so that interrelates to the church, especially, you know, so yeah, fascinating.
Before we get into the philosophy of psychedelics, I think to touch on the consciousness aspect here, you mentioned you're going to write a piece on Bernardo Castro's analytic idealism.
What is this going to be about?
And, and if you could, how would you really define your view of consciousness or do you consider yourself a panpsychosis?
Because I know you wrote your, your PhD on panpsychism, but what is your actual view?
If you don't mind me asking.
Yeah.
Good question.
I think it's a fusion.
I mean, first of all, I, I always say that I don't believe really anything.
I entertain ideas, right?
So I'm not absolutely dogmatic about my view because I know problems, you know, when you really get into something, you know, the problem is better than anyone else.
So it's hard.
I'm not, but at the moment, my preference is for, um, a fusion really between Spinoza and Whitehead.
And, um, so it's a kind of, um, it is a panpsychism.
So I do believe that consciousness or sentience or mentality, uh, runs throughout the whole of nature.
Absolutely.
Um, I believe, I mean, I, I'm honest.
I think that mind and matter are essentially the same thing.
So this is a Spinozism, you know, like the mind and matter being different attributes or expressions of the same substance, but unlike Spinoza and with Whitehead, um, I'm a process philosopher as well.
So I believe that, um, you know, that, so for Spinoza, you know, the laws of nature were constant because of, uh, because essentially nature was God and it had to be perfect.
Right.
So, and that didn't allow for freedom, uh, mental causation, you know, effective mental causation.
Whereas with Whitehead, um, you've got this creative universe as creative impulse.
And, um, so I, I sort of, um, I always say, you know, Spinoza plus Darwin equals Whitehead.
So that's the kind of, so I'm going, so I would, I would, I would classify myself as a Whiteheadian, but with certain caveats, you know, some of the details in Whitehead, I don't think unnecessary, for example.
But, you know, like one thing that I, um, especially think is important and Whitehead, you can also go to Bergson and Bradley to some extent is this amazing, um, concept of prehension, um, which is, um, means that, um, it's, it's in a way the, the opposite of, uh, representation.
It's a form of perception, but it's not representation.
It's the kind of absorption of the outside to the object into the inside as a way, into the subject.
So part of the object becomes part of the subject.
So the relationship between appearance and reality is really, uh, the relationship between part and whole.
That's very, you know, so that's sort of some, uh, uh, symbiosis of Bergson and Whitehead.
They admired each other's work.
I think that's extremely important.
So there's a, it's a type of realism as, as against idealism, you know, um, that you actually do perceive
the outside world.
Now you, of course you color it to a certain extent due to our evolution or whatever, but
there's a certain influx of reality into our perception.
In fact, part of the outside becomes part of the inside.
And that's the kind of, I think that concept is, um, especially important.
Something I like to pursue.
So it's a kind of, that's part of, and it's process relational philosophy really.
And it's related to the, you know, 4E cognition and whatever extended mind, but it's kind of
more original form of it, more extreme form really.
So what would you address in Bernardo Kastrup's idealism in this piece?
What would be the most important aspects of it?
Where would you differentiate yourself from his work and which part is parts of his work
do you admire?
If any, because I'm not sure if this is a, this is going to be a critique or a, we'll see.
I've got a, I've got a funny relationship with Bernardo Kastrup because you know, over the years I've criticized him a bit.
Um, on shopping, understanding Schopenhauer Nietzsche and so on.
Um, but we did have a conversation recorded actually about a month ago.
And, um, I think we were really affable, like whatever.
And I did enjoy his book.
You know, I do like the way that he sort of ruffles up feathers, especially in the psychedelic world.
Um, he presents an alternative, at least makes people think, even if you don't agree with it fully.
So anyway, um, reading his latest book, analytic, uh, idealism in a nutshell is a summary book, really small book.
Um, yeah.
You know, I had some good points.
It's pretty much Kantianism.
Um, so there's, uh, but not quite actually, it's a mixture between Kant and, and Hegel, but neither of them.
So it's, it's the view that, um, you know, we represent the world in a particular way.
And, um, but the way we represent the world is very different from how the world actually is.
So there's a strong difference between appearance and reality.
So that phenomenon, that's the Kantian aspect of it.
And he uses the metaphor of a dashboard, you know?
So, um, you know, um, we see the dial in an airplane.
We see, you know, let's say the outside temperature on a dial.
Um, of course that represents the actual world is that is not the actual world.
The dial is not the actual world itself.
Eddington made the same metaphor, interestingly, um, hundred years ago.
Um, but so, so the outside world is kind of unknowable to in itself.
But then he makes this argument, which is a bit loose as part of my review that, um, and actually commits a fallacy of the undistributed middle, I think fundamentally.
But, um, it's the view that, well, um, the outside, we don't know what the outside world is, but we know it's non-physical.
Um, and what do I know, what, what do I know, what, what do I know is non-physical?
And then he says the mental.
So then he makes this move that therefore the outside world is mental.
I sort of simplify it, but it's, it's, that's his idealism.
So it's that in that sense is like Hegel, you know, so, um, um, the whole reality is, is, is mental.
And we are part of that.
Um, but it differs.
So, so that's how it's Hegelian sense, but it differs from Hegel in the sense that for Hegel, you know, this, um, this outside reality is the sort of logical unfurling of Geist.
You know, it's a very rational, um, mind as it were, right.
It's essentially God, the absolute, but for Kastrup, this outside mentality, and he uses Huxley's term mind at large, interestingly.
Um, but he doesn't, not in the same way that Huxley does really following Bergson.
So for Kastrup, the outside world is, um, a mind, but it's a very primitive mind because it hasn't gone through the sort of adaptability evolution forces upon organisms.
So it's kind of like a goldfish mind.
It was kind of toddler God as it were.
So not quite pantheism.
Um, yeah.
Um, so I, my main difference is that I believe the dashboard, the appearance and reality as I've intimated is porous.
So, uh, imagine a dashboard where it's got some sort of colored glass portholes maybe, and some events coming in.
Right.
So yes, we do see the world through a glass darkly, but there's, it's not a complete difference.
There are degrees of difference between appearance and reality.
And that's how that's the realism.
And the interesting thing, right, is historically, this is the history.
Um, this is the history of, of, of idealism that was lost in, in, in the West.
Um, one of the reasons that idealism was put down is because of the war and the church and the bourgeois and the industry and scientists and whatnot.
But another reason is logical, you know, it actually developed into realism.
Um, like I said, Brit Bradley's appearance in reality was a pivotal moment.
And, um, and that's what I prefer, you know, this kind of, because I think otherwise you're really alienated from nature, you know, you're sort of almost in the solipsist world.
Um, but with this prehension, with this sort of absorption of the outside to the in, then you avoid that and you don't need to assume solipsism.
And, uh, yeah, it just, it just makes more sense to me realism over representationalism.
Hmm.
So, because someone, Bernardo loves working with Don Hoffman and they, they often talk about each other's work.
And when he does the math and physics, they seem to come to the conclusion that we don't see reality as what it is at all.
So there's, there's no sort of porous dashboard.
It's actually just non-existent and, and we've made up certain ways to do this.
Do you think that sort of naive realism taking to its absolute extreme is what if it's true though?
What if it is something, what if we really are not seeing this for what it is?
I mean, I get what you're talking about.
You want this to be some sort of a real feeling, but what, what if it's not?
How would we go about trying to disprove that?
I'm not just by the way.
Well, I'll prove it.
Uh, so I'm not just like you.
I have no, at this point with this podcast, I have no idea where I stand.
It's, it's getting harder and harder every day.
So, but, um, become more and more fascinated by each theory at this point.
And I find proving and disproving many of them is becoming more and more difficult.
Yeah.
Well, with naive realism, so like you see reality as it actually is.
I'm not advocating that.
And that's not the realism really that came maybe with more, but it's not really the realism.
I prefer the organic realism as it's so-called whiteheads and so on.
Um, but I think with naive realism, it's somewhat easy to disprove because you just consider the fact that, um, you know, different perspectives of the same object will change the color of it.
And my, you know, without different light sources, there's different colors.
It's hard to say that the sort of, for example, the color exists out there to a certain extent.
And of course we can understand that different species will have evolved different, um, sense modalities, you know, and, um, to the extent that, you know, we can't even know what they are really.
That was, you know, quite of Nagel's famous, what's it like to be a bat essay.
And, um, and the fact that even within your own self, you see things differently at different times, especially if you're taking drugs.
Right.
So, um, it's hard to say, well, there are normal conditions.
This was actually attempted by a few people that are normal condition, normal conditions.
Then this is the reality, but I don't think there's such a thing as normal conditions to, to lose from it.
So, um, and also, you know, like, um, what Bergson calls a rhythm of duration or time rates, you know, the speed at which you see things move.
There's no, there's no objective form of that.
You know, there can't be an objective form of that.
So, um, you understand there must be, you know, I'm sort of arguing against myself and I'd say, but there must, there must be, I always take a hybrid view.
I always take a hybrid view that there must be, um, certain, um, elements that we project into reality.
It's very interesting as well.
When you look at space and different dimensions of space, you know, like, um, WK Clifford, who was in a Cambridge Apostle.
He, he spoke about, um, a worm, a two dimensional worm and how it would perceive reality would perceive bends as force, for example.
Right.
And you can understand when you read this, you know, that's right.
You know, so we, we experienced sort of a three dimensional space as it were, um, and forces.
But in theory, if you increase the dimensionality of your perception, you might perceive a force as another dimension.
Right.
So, so there's, you, you can consider conceptually understand how, um, the way we perceive the world is not a necessity at all.
It doesn't have to be that way.
So that's my idealist angle.
Um, and also my idealist angle is that consciousness is ubiquitous throughout the cosmos.
Um, but at the same time.
Um, it's like Bradley makes this point that it is, um, an assumption to think that the feelings, let's say you have are confined within yourself.
Because if you think about pure experience, you don't make that distinction between me and the outside world.
Right.
Uh, that's a later inference.
So, um, to think that we only know, um, our own minds is a really later derivative position as intellectual position.
It's not a pure phenomenological position.
So take, you know, like, um, Bradley then argues that, you know, we can share emotions, you know?
So when you, let's say come into a room and, uh, and, uh, you suddenly sort of lighten up, let's say it's a party, whatever.
And you see, and you think, well, why did I lighten up?
Okay.
Because people are smiling and laughing and saying, Hey, welcome.
Um, and then you think, ah, yeah, that's good.
I'm appreciate it.
Or this is going to be a fun night or whatever.
Um, or.
Are emotions somehow part of, and this is, comes back to panpsychism now.
Are emotions as Whitehead believed it, um, part of what we call matter or physicality, like forces.
So not extra to, not something extraneous to forces, but part of forces.
So we see like electromagnetism.
We think of electric magnetism in this particular way, but for Whitehead, this is an abstraction.
In other words, any part of the truth, you know, the real, the full truth would be that there's an emotion within light, for example.
You know, it explains aesthetic appreciation to an extent.
And so likewise, you know, like we, um, you know, seeing others, it's not just a perceptual kind of television representation.
It's rather an absorption of who they are and so on to a certain extent, but it's on this primitive level list that is subconscious.
So, um, for, for Whitehead at least.
So we, we're not sort of consciously aware of it, but, um, nonetheless, it influences us as does sunlight and so on.
Like, you know, sunbathing, whatnot.
Well, speaking of light and most people are going to see the frequencies of our shirts as very much the same, but we just want to clarify that they're not.
They're probably, they're probably slightly different.
It's a bit of a naive.
Slightly different, but, uh, not similar.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And numerically distinct.
Yeah.
Yes.
Definitely different, uh, frequencies here and there.
Tell me, Peter, if you had to, if you had Huxley, James, um, Whitehead, Nietzsche, Spinoza and Schopenhauer all hanging on a cliff.
One of them's about to, well, all of them are falling, but you can only save one.
Who would you save?
And why?
That's harsh.
That's harsh.
That's an intense question.
It's probably the darkest question I've asked on this show.
Yeah, that's the darkest.
Um, well, not Schopenhauer because he probably, you know, like, would want to go.
Um, uh, I, I, oh God.
I guess Nietzsche might also want to go.
Possibly.
No, I think Nietzsche was an optimist.
Ultimately.
I think it's got a bad rep.
But, um, I think I'd, I'd bring back Whitehead probably cause I've got a few questions for him.
You know, what would those questions be?
Uh, what he meant by, you know, certain, I mean, it gets so complex sometimes in some of his works that you, there's multiple interpretations of it.
Actually.
No, I wouldn't.
In fact, Spinoza is a deep question about whether the attribute is a famous thing in Spinoza's studies about whether the attributes are subjective or objective.
So I'd ask him about that.
Probably.
Yeah.
Did, when you started in this field, did you have any preconceived ideas when you first entered the philosophy arena?
Let's say, for example, coming in as a materialist where you have an emergentist and then slowly transition into this panpsychus view, what, what, what has been your view over time?
How's that?
Well, I, yeah, it's interesting.
I mean, you sort of, it's related to obvious.
You can't avoid inculcation, right?
You can't avoid being brainwashed by a culture at certain extent or to a full extent, maybe.
So I came in from, I'm half Swedish, half British, but I've lived most of my life in Britain, in Cornwall, came in as a kind of strict materialist really, but I had never really studied it.
So I didn't know whether I was like an identity theorist or an emergentist or an epiphenomenalist or whatever elements of this.
But obviously there was just matter and mind came out of brains, a certain activity in the brain, which we are yet to discover.
That was my, my general view.
And, and, but then when I started to actually study, that was my default view.
Right.
And it's kind of what I was taught.
It was, it was kind of subconsciously taught in schools, you know, it was never explicitly told, you know, this is the reality.
It's just kind of these unwritten assumptions that really influence people because they're unquestioned and you, you don't bring it to consciousness.
But when I looked into it, I saw that there were different types of materialism.
So then which one do you believe?
Right. And then I, when you look into the history, you realize why people, why I actually believe that.
And then, um, I look for alternatives.
I think as well that studying Bergson and Kant especially, um, open my mind up because in Britain, you know, you're not taught philosophy at all.
So, uh, yeah, not at school.
So when I started reading at university, um, it was just an eye opener because I'd always considered anything non-materialistic to be like religious new age nonsense.
That's exactly the same thing that happened to me.
Right.
Yeah.
Um, yeah.
But, uh, but now I think materialism is an ideology as well.
And, um, and it's in the same ballpark as, as a lot of the other theories.
So, yeah, no, I think, well, one thing that influenced me actually with regards to my pan-psychist sort of, um, uh, veering was Nietzsche because he spoke about, you know, the will to power.
Will is a match coming from shop and I would certain extent.
Um, and he said, this is a pathos.
The will to power is a pathos, right?
It's a feeling.
And this is fundamental.
I mean, this is more in his notebooks and his published work, but some in his public work would be on good needle section 36.
I seem to remember, um, that there's this kind of fundamental drive.
It was subconscious as a drive to development, you know, and, uh, that kind of got me thinking.
And then I read Schopenhauer, which is much more sort of philosophically developed.
But his is more of a will to survive, really.
Spinoza, you get the canatus somewhat similar as well.
So that got me thinking, you know, this, there's this kind of underlying drive and we represent it as matter and force and whatever, but it's not the essential aspect of reality.
And, uh, that inner aspect of reality, you can feel within yourself, your drives, um, and your emotions are sort of, um, secondary to those.
And, um, reading Bergson, Keith Ansel Pearson, like I said, I was never really that fond of Bergson's special kind of dualism, but it was interesting.
There's things you can take out of Bergson still.
And, um, yeah, and then I, um, and then I properly read Whitehead and, um, and that seemed to quell a lot of my issues.
Anyway, you're reading all this.
And then you go back to the people we spoke with a few years ago and they're just still, still stuck in that.
Yeah. What are you talking about?
You know, obviously like, you know, um, and then you think, no, it's not, it's not that simple.
There are problems and, um, yeah, and I still, I'm still not saying that I know what the, what the truth is, uh, you know, as I say, I've just got preferences.
Um, but I hope to develop them as time goes by.
Yeah.
Of course, when you develop, you, you, you discover more problems as well.
So exactly.
Yeah.
The more, you know, the more you question.
Yeah.
The answer becomes less obvious, but I mean, to quote you, quoting someone else, let's take a trip at this point.
Um, psychedelics, the philosophy of psychedelics.
Firstly, how does one come in, get into this field and, and make a career out of it?
And secondly, what is the philosophy of psychedelics?
Um, well, maybe start, maybe start with the second question, then go to the first.
What is the philosophy of psychedelics?
Well, um, here's our book on it, philosophy and psychedelics.
So you can get a start there in the introduction, especially.
Um, the philosophy of psychedelics is, I would say a relatively new phenomenon, even though, as I say, people, William James, as you mentioned, was sort of speaking about it in 1902.
And actually before that, uh, in, in, uh, 1892, I think he wrote on some Hegel isms and the footnote is all about how he understood Hegel after taking nitrous oxide.
Right. So it kind of starts with James to a certain extent, the founder of modern psychology as well.
Um, and it's a, it's a way of, I mean, it's, it's, it's all, it's very encompasses a lot.
So you've got the phenomenology and then there's, you, you can apply phenomenology classic and salient phenomenology to it and so on.
Um, it's completely new data for phenomenology.
And in fact, something has developed in the philosophy of psychedelics called micro phenomenology to really sort of pin down what's going on.
Um, from my own, my own preferences to apply knowledge of metaphysics to psychedelic experience.
So for example, in that book, I've written a, um, an essay on, um, framing the experience of five MEO DMT, which is a very, um, powerful psychedelic in spinosis terms, in relation to the so-called intellectual love of God or nature.
Um, I've also written about, yeah, I've just, um, written about, um, Bergson's influence on Huxley and the doors of perception.
Um, and it's interesting how you can frame in different ways psychedelic experience according to old, uh, metaphysics.
In fact, my, the book I'm writing now for Bloomsbury, another one is called the psychedelic metaphysics manual.
And it's, um, about offering to people without a philosophical background, um, different metaphysical options in which they might interpret their psychedelic experience and, uh, make it significant.
It's based on an essay of mine on the need for metaphysics and psychedelic therapy and research.
So that's, that's my preference, but there's a lot of stuff like, um, a lot of stuff on, um, epistemology, obviously.
How do we know, you know, how do we, how do we know that what we're experiencing is, uh, veridical or delusory?
Um, there's a lot of ethical issues.
Like for example, the comforting delusion objection, which Michael Pollan and, um, and, um, others have spoken of.
So like, is it not unethical to make people better by fostering a delusion upon them via psychedelics?
You know, so there's a lot of different answers, um, to that question.
Um, Chris Leatherby's written a good book addressing that in part.
Um, and then, yeah, so, so, I mean, the three, I mean, the three columns of philosophy, traditionally metaphysics, epistemology, and ethics are all, um, parts, all part of the philosophy of psychedelics.
And interestingly, um, as this, um, whole psychedelic renaissance unfolds, more and more ethical questions come into view, you know, with relation to like the law and appropriation of indigenous use and, uh, you know, safety issues and, uh, all sorts of things.
You know, and, and really what I, although I, you know, yeah, I'm in the philosophy of psychedelics in Exeter university.
I'm really in more, the more broader scope of psychedelic research generally, because it is by its nature interdisciplinary, you know?
So you need the neuroscientists there, of course, Leo Roseman from Imperial.
Um, you need the anthropologists going out, you know, and discovering, talking about how psychedelic use, um, differs from current use.
You need historians.
I mean, if we look at like, for example, psychedelic therapy in the fifties, it was the psychiatrist was taking the psychedelic run patient.
That was turned around.
Right.
Um, you know, criminologists, sociologists with relation to the law, um, you know, psychologists, obviously psychiatrists, uh, pharmacologists.
You need all of those specialisms to get a full, concrete, satisfactory view of what's going on.
And of course the, the reason for it all is that, um, contrary to the sort of propaganda of the last few decades, um, it's now realized that psychedelics can be quite therapeutic rather than harmful to people.
So, and that's why a lot of money is being put into it.
In Exeter University, we've started the first masters in psychedelics, um, online, PG cert.
We've got a masters in person starting in, uh, late 2025.
And, um, yeah, so what's going on.
Um, and it's not just Exeter, of course, UCL, Imperial, Harvard, just got a huge grant for psychedelic research, $16 million, I think last year.
So it's a, it's a mushrooming field.
I like that.
Um, when, when I think about it, and as a, as a doctor, when I used to work in, as a psychiatry medical officer in, in the public sector, uh, in the state facilities here in South Africa.
And you see the effect that certain psychedelics have had on patients and causing psychosis, delusions, et cetera.
But then you go to the private sector and you see a completely different type of patient.
You see the people who have been using it or therapy or solving trauma, et cetera.
And, and you see such an abrupt difference.
You can tell that the type of usage, the way it's used, the way it's controlled or, or even uncontrolled can provide positive or negative effects.
I tried my best to not make this a medical podcast.
So just, I've always got a disclaimer.
This is not medical advice ever.
This is a philosophy podcast, but what have you seen since the new rise in psychedelic use in research?
Um, both anecdotally and empirically evidence-wise, what has been the shift that's occurring currently?
Um, if we say the psychedelic renaissance started about 12 years ago, so, um, the first sort of phase of that was to really forcefully try to move people's perceptions away from like, um, the negative aspects of psychedelics.
Um, that they make you jump out windows or they lead to psychosis or neurosis or, um, that they're addictive.
Um, so on, um, the hippie kind of connotations, all of that.
Um, so you had in psychedelic conferences, a lot of, you know, like a white shirted doctors coming in and talking about brain regions.
Um, that was the first phase.
Um, and then a lot more research.
I mean, when I, when I started, I should say, you know, like when I started, people said to me, don't get into this.
It would be a career killer, you know, um, don't mess with your brain, your mind.
Number one.
Secondly, you know, don't, don't write about this because it's not seen as serious, but you know, like, it's just too interesting intrinsically.
You, when you, when you've had the psychedelic experience, it's just so radically different.
It's just so rich or it can be in a way that you just have to like, look into it again.
Hmm.
Well, I just pursued it, but I didn't, as you said, you know, my PhD thesis was not on psychedelics.
It was on panpsychism, you know, and that's radical enough.
But, um, I was just about to say, you chose both the, the, the fields, I mean, it's consciousness and psychedelics.
You, you went all in.
Yeah.
I know.
I know.
I live it living on the edge.
Yeah.
Almost falling off.
But, um, yeah, no, no.
Can't return to your question.
Um, so, so there was that phase.
Um, another interesting thing really was that, you know, like in the early 20th century, there was some, um, trials on like DMT, especially just looking at neural correlates of DMT and it wasn't for therapeutic purposes.
Um, and then the sixties, you know, as well, like it wasn't, there was therapy involved.
And there's like, um, psycholytic therapy in Europe and psychedelic therapy in America, which different.
So European one was very Freudian based psychoanalytic based, but, um, but, uh, you know, like the general, uh, you know, uh, feeling about psychedelics was that they were political tools.
You know, like you get it in my Cusa, you know, like, um, his essay on liberation 1960, was it that psychedelics are a way of seeing the world differently.
You know, seeing like how we're being, um, you know, like, um, encaged within certain political systems and so on, you know, but in the 21st century, they're seen as therapeutic tools.
People have been really careful now, um, doing very careful analysis, um, because they, everyone is scared that, um, this potential form of, um, medicine or therapy, uh, won't get approved, you know, and, uh, that would be quite disastrous for a lot of people.
So, so it's a very step by step, small, cautious, uh, unlike, unlike, you know, like a few decades ago.
Um, but, but the interesting thing is, you know, when you look at the, before that, before the sixties, when you look at like Osmond, like I mentioned, Humphrey Osmond, who's a British, um, psychiatrist.
We worked with Huxley and the philosopher John Smith, he's very interesting philosopher, neuro philosopher.
Um, it was intellectual, you know, like, um, Osmond himself as a psychiatrist said, you know, the, the, the important thing about psychedelics in his, in his essay of the 1957 where he coins it.
Is it, is, is it, you know, religious, sociological and philosophical implications that has been lost, you know?
And, um, that was, that was forgotten about really, which is a great busy.
And, um, and so with the philosophy of psychedelics, that is, we're returning to that certain extent, you know, I think.
So it's, it's, you know, still it's growing and, um, it's kind of, it's got loose form.
Um, you can't really strictly define it like consciousness, you know, but it's really fascinating.
I mean, especially if you're a philosophy, if you're interested in consciousness, if you're interested in philosophy minds, you know, um, why not explore that whole amazing cosmos of different forms of experience.
I mean, forms of experience, which don't even have, you know, you can't really explain.
I mean, I mean, I've experienced things on psilocybin, which are, you could just about call them experiences, but they're not, they can't be categorized as let's say a sensation or a conception.
Or a feeling, but nonetheless, very power, very powerful type of experience, you know?
So, so just trying to sort of get a grip on what, what was going on there, you know?
And, and also it just makes you realize the power of the mind, you know, that the mind can create these most amazing visual.
I don't know, like spaceships and cosmic journeys and aliens and all these things, but also just kind of what would probably be defined as mystical states, which are not visual at all in many cases, you know, but just these intense states of existence.
I remember when I made the intro for this podcast at some point, I remember saying any atypical state of mind is an absolutely valuable asset to the study of mind.
And I mean, these states of mind are very, very fascinating.
Anyone who studies the mind who neglects this portion of the field, it's, it's such a massive component.
This is something that if you do not study, you're making the most ignorant decision you can make when you concluding anything about the mind.
I think it's like if you studied music, but you only listened to 21st century music would be like that, you know?
You don't want to listen to all the, everything that's before, you know, all the whole other world of music.
You have to fight against prejudice, you know, with, with regard to psychedelics.
A lot of people still don't take it seriously.
Hard to get kind of state approved funding for it.
Although in balance that you do get a lot of philanthropists who are interested, rich philanthropists, you know, who are interested in it instead.
But no, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm happy in this world.
And also it's kind of like, there's a nice community.
I'm also director of Breaking Convention, which is Europe's largest psychedelic conference.
You know, we've got 800, 1800 people come to Exeter in April now.
And, and it's just a lovely kind of communal feel to it.
Having said that though, it has become a little bit self-conscious in the last few years, a bit, a bit self-critical as to where it's going and some bad apples and stuff like that.
So generally it's a nice place to be.
But I would say in any field of you, there's always a bunch of bad apples.
Yeah, exactly. Nothing.
It's not like it's something you can escape in any, in any way.
No.
There was a term you used once.
I can't remember where I saw this or read it, but you were describing these experiences that are not what we call qualia site.
You named it something when you have this ethereal experience that's not describable.
Do you remember what that was?
Well, maybe you mean the term ineffable, which is from William James.
Actually, Humphrey Davy mentioned it before.
Yeah, you can't put it into words.
I use the word Psy-X for psychedelic experience.
I think that was it.
Yeah, but it's interesting thing about if certain psychedelic induced mystical experiences are ineffable, if you can't put them into words and you can't report them, then you can't get a neural correlate to them either.
Right.
And, and I think that that is a kind of, I mean, that's another thing that psychedelic research does brings up these interesting theoretical questions as to, well, how, you know, what are really the limits of neuroscience and understanding the mind if there are things that you can't report, you know, just like animal brains, minds, right?
You can't really fully correlate things because you don't get one side of the correlate.
You don't get the report, right?
Same with psychedelic drugs for human beings.
Some people say no, it is.
I mean, William James said the ineffable man writes 200 pages about it later.
Right.
So it's, it's all debatable.
Interestingly, Castro wasn't a massive spat.
His, his take is that psychedelics were shown to decrease brain activity or brain activity.
Right.
Which kind of falsified for him physicalism or emergentism that, you know, with greater relevant brain activity, you'd get greater phenomena.
You'd get greater phenomenology and thus opens the door for idealism.
But, but that I think is an open question.
You know, I don't like, so I, I spoke to someone on the study who said, no, it didn't show that at all.
And, and so it's an open question, but you know, it's very fascinating.
Like this is a very interesting question.
Let's say that you did further tests to determine whether certain psychedelics decreased brain activity, whilst the report was of intense, rich experience, ordered experience.
That would be a fascinating finding, wouldn't it?
If it, if it was, you know, verified and, and checked and, you know, tested many times.
That would tell us that would actually be like a, a way of empirically getting into metaphysics to some extent.
Right.
Hmm.
It's psychedelics that would allow for such tests because it sort of temporarily changes functioning of normal prosaic brain functioning.
So, so, so yeah, there's a lot of interesting things yet to discover, I think.
And yet there are some scientific theories that possibly could explain this.
If you get someone like John Joe McFadden's semi field theory, perhaps, because merely looking at these neural correlates might not be the answer.
Someone like Stuart Hameroff might be right.
Penrose might be right.
Because maybe when you do look at this from a, from a quantum perspective, something might be going on.
They describe it as Occam's razor.
If you can solve this with quantum mechanics, it solves multiple things in one go.
Because people often say, okay, we don't know consciousness.
We don't know quantum mechanics.
And, and now we're trying to make a theory that can explain both.
But I mean, Occam's razor does say, you should be able to, if you could.
Ideally.
But I don't know enough about quantum theory to judge that, you know.
I don't like to, I never like to talk about quantum theory because when I speak to quantum theorists, they will disagree with each other anyway.
So I guess, I guess combining consciousness, psychedelics and quantum theories, that's a bit too much.
At that point, we are taking a little too far.
Well, personally, I have taken psilocybin in the past.
I think it was maybe about six, seven years ago.
It's been a long time.
Maybe perhaps I'm overdue.
But I remember having one horrible experience, but it's my partner, my sister's fault.
She, she, she ruined the vibe.
Let's just say she killed it for, for all of us.
And, and then what we did was, I think two days later, because it was quite a traumatic experience.
And then two days later, her husband, myself, I don't even know if I should be sharing this.
But anyway, we're too late.
You can always cut it out, can't he?
But I might keep it in.
We, we, we redid it just to, just to, and we told her, look, you can't, you cannot join us for this one.
We just, we kept it out.
We, we, we put it, put it to the corner, just the naughty corner for a bit.
And then the best experience.
All of us just had the wonderful time, life changing.
Some of us stopped.
I mean, one person stopped smoking.
One person, I mean, it was, it was quite a therapeutic environment.
We set it up in a way where we all had these goals, this new year's resolution.
It was pretty cool.
You're welcome.
So these, these effects I felt, first person phenomenological experiences.
And I do get what you're talking about.
But I'm curious to know, how do you define psychedelics?
Because I often think when we try and define this, it's also quite difficult,
because anything could be psychoactive in a sense.
If you take caffeine, if you eat a really intense meal, that's got a high dose of sugar.
At what point do we differentiate between normal psychoactive substances
and an absolutely psychoactive substance like psilocybin or DMT, et cetera?
Well, again, there's no sharp edges here.
There's a big debate about it actually.
So the sort of easy answer would be to limit the term psychedelic to those drugs that act on the,
what are they, 5,2-HA receptors or serotonin receptors.
So that would be LSD, psilocybin, you know, the classics.
Well, generally known as classic psychedelics.
So that would be like relatively clear cut way of defining them.
However, that would exclude salvia divinorum, for example, which is, has very similar effects to LSD.
Some GABA receptors, I think I said.
Also, when you read the, you know, this 1957 paper by Osmond, where he actually coins it.
Before that, he was in correspondence with Huxley about what to call these new agents.
He sort of includes nitrous oxide because of William James's work.
And he defines it mostly phenomenologically rather than physiologically.
And I prefer this generally speaking.
So you would include nitrous oxide and thus you would also include ketamine.
In fact, only working at Exeter did I realize that ketamine at high doses can be very visual and sort of psilocybin like.
But do you include, you know, MDMA, for example, ecstasy?
Do you include cannabis?
I, yeah, that's where the edges get blurred.
But I'm, I personally generally am quite open in my definition.
And then you get like psychedelic as an adjective, you know, like, so you can say maybe breathwork induces psychedelic experiences, right?
So breathwork itself, of course, is dutchiness.
But the effects, the phenomenology is somewhat similar.
So, so, yeah, so my only, my only definition is I would not restrict it to serotonin receptors, drugs that act on directly on serotonin receptors.
I would keep it more open than that and base it more on phenomenology.
So what phenomenology?
Well, altered states of consciousness.
But there are many such states, I'm thinking LSD, psilocybin, mescaline, they induce like these beautiful can induce quite often in beautiful visions.
But if you take five MEO DMT, which I mentioned, that is just not beautiful visions at all.
It's just, you know, well, white light generally speaking white light, and then the loss of everything, you know, loss of sight, hearing, memory, thought pattern, sense of times or lost.
But there's a profound experience or state of being that that remains, you know, and that's known as a psychedelic.
I mean, it coincides with the word mystical if you if you try to define that there's so many different definitions of that in the early 20th and mid 20th century William James, you know, find it in certain ways height, you know, passive, ineffable, noetic, and transient.
But then other people define it in different ways. I mean, what in trials today, a number of questionnaires are used to determine the experiences people had on psychedelics.
And a lot of those questionnaires, especially the MEQ mystical experience question is based on a philosophy book.
by Walter Stace from 1960, on mysticism and philosophy, and he defines mysticism in a certain way there, but it differs from others, you know, it's, yeah, no, I don't think you can define these things that well, generally, I think, you know, what's important ultimately is, you know, how we use those definitions.
There's also another interesting aspect to this, which is that because of the kind of Christian heritage and also platonic or neoplatonic heritage we have in the West.
There was a way of interpreting psychedelic experiences as particularly mystical or theological in a way, whereas when you look at psychedelic use in, let's say, Peru.
Very different, very different, you know, like, it's not about becoming one with the universe or connecting or losing the sense of space, you know, never mentioned these things.
And, and so you have to sort of wonder whether people are being primed into expecting these experiences because of the history of the field, or whether they're having those experiences because of their general Western cultural context.
Or whether they're having many experiences, but they're only being asked to report on certain experiences.
So, a paper came out, a preprint last month that I co-authored our secondary author, not the main author, but the suggestion to rename psychedelics into psychosomadelics, including the body, because there's a lot of like bodily feelings that are very often ignored in these, in these trials and whatever, right?
So there's so much cultural baggage that comes into the science. It's quite, it's quite alarming, actually.
It can't escape the psychology and philosophy. I find both of them equally fascinating in different ways. Well, not equally, but both fascinating in different ways.
But the ontological aspect of this, the metaphysics behind it, it's such a fascinating feel. It's so difficult to not get absorbed and high on this feeling of discussing it.
But I always say that, yeah, psychedelics are a gateway drug to metaphysics. Ultimately, that's, that's what's going on.
Yeah, it's impossible to not discuss it. But something I find fascinating is, I mean, one could say that, okay, you get you, let's say you use psilocybin, you start to notice that the earth is sort of breathing, you start to see the earth as an organism, and then you sort of realize that this entire planet is alive.
planet is alive. Is that because that is the essence? I mean, we use you briefly touched on the comforting delusion. But I mean, that could be the one aspect, but the other could be the plant has just developed this gene that allows it to trick us to, to enjoy these wonderful occasions and thereafter, and nurture itself by because we'll obviously plant this and keep it going. So they might just, it might just have nothing to do with it. But I mean, there are obviously delusions.
delusions going on, you know, if you see a pink elephant walk across the table, you know, it's probably not any little truth value to that.
Yeah, that's the question. I mean, that's the interesting question, which metaphysical and epistemic. And, you know, do these drugs allow you to see some form of reality in there? And you can't, I mean, with the comforting delusion objection.
I mean, there's, there's a metaphysical assumption of materialism there, right? Well, we know what reality is. And therefore, if you experience like an idea idealism, which is quite common, for example, or pantheism, or some kind of monism or whatever, you know, unit of experience, and that obviously is false. So therefore, one shouldn't treat people with it. Well, okay, yeah, if you're, if you've established the fact that you are, that materialism is true, but that's the question, right? And
And what are, you know, some studies from Imperial, from Chris Timmerman, people like that, well, Chris Timmerman's study a few years ago showed that generally, when people take psychedelics, they do shift their metaphysical positions, generally away from physicalism to kind of panpsychism.
But the problems with those, those studies, like, it didn't include idealism, for example, pantheism within it. And the way they define panpsychism is kind of loose. And, but nonetheless, there are metaphysical shifts. I mean, the fun, the classic cases in philosophy is AJ Ayers experience, you know, I don't know if you ever read about that. But he, yeah, he choked on salmon, and had a psychedelic experience.
experience. And, and wrote an article saying that he now believes that consciousness might survive death after all, but there's still no God. Yeah, so yeah, like you say, these, these experiences can be life changing.
But are they true? How do you determine truth? This is the classic question. I think that what the hard problem of consciousness does is that it leaves options open.
And when you really understand that you realise you can't easily just dismiss idealism, or absolute monism or, or whatever. And they are, I think, open questions, there's a lot of logic behind all of them, a lot of criticism, criticisms behind all of them. But anyway, the point is that they are open questions.
And, and, and when you have a psychedelic experience, and it is thus possible, that you are having, in certain cases, vertical experiences, you know, on the sort of deeper cases where you, we have those kind of like classic mystical experiences, I think, there's mystical experiences, some evidence shows that they are actually conducive to therapy as well.
As well. And then, yeah, so, so I don't think though, that the experience itself can prove any metaphysical experience, right? For that, you still need philosophy and science. And, you know, to sort of, you need both of them there. Right? Yeah, I don't think just dismiss them out of hand, because, you know, delusion is, you know, like, completely dependent on what you understand reality to be.
So maybe there are, there's some kind of truths. Like, for example, I was mentioning Whitehead's theory of prehension, which is like the absorption of feeling from the outside into the inside, you know, using spatial metaphors.
So often with psychedelics, you know, you look at a plant, and you sort of feel it, you know, you think you feel it. And this could be one of the reasons why people do kind of get more sympathetic to panpsychism to a certain extent.
So, and under sort of Whiteheadian framework, you can kind of begin to understand it a little bit more, you know, you are becoming a little bit more conscious of that prehensive activity that generally happens, or you're a bit more open to it, or your mind kind of fixates on it, to a certain extent.
That doesn't prove it's true, of course, but it does make more sense of it.
So, so I'm open, like I say, I'm quite open minded to these things, being possibly veridical, but at the same time, I do realise that some of them are mutually exclusive, you know, so like, you might have an absolute idealist experience one day, and the next day you have dualist experience, you know.
Yeah. But it seems to me that these psychedelic drugs seem to move towards more of a non-dual experience. For the most part, it does feel like you become more at one with everything else.
And what, Peter, from your side, what's been, from your first person experience in your research, what's been the most intense experience, and what was the substance?
Well, there's only one contender for that, which is the 5-MeO-DMT, that I tried once in a legal setting, I should say.
And just 5-MeO-DMT is not DMT, not normal DMT, which people speak about. It's radically different in its effects.
You can get it from the secretions of the Sonoran Desert Toad, and also in some vines, and synthetic versions of it.
What happened to me was quite extreme.
I, um, there's a guy I know who does it every single Sunday for the last sort of four or five years, right?
Every, without fail, which, uh, I can't really understand.
I tried it once, and I actually don't dare to take it again at the moment.
Anyway, that was about two years ago.
Um, what happened, well, what happened to me is I, um, I, I tried a small bit with a vaporizer and, uh, didn't work, and I, I thought I measured it out properly.
I had this friend of mine sort of, you know, supervising, very importantly, um, and said, okay, let's, let's, let's increase the dose.
Nothing happened.
Third time, nothing happened.
I said, okay, I'm one of these, like, small percentage of people just doesn't get an effect from it.
I said, just give me the rest, then I'll just try that.
That was a mistake.
So I don't know how much it took, but it was, uh, it was what happened then is to breathe it and you hold it.
And then suddenly, um, what happened to me at least was, um, suddenly everything goes white.
So you sort of become blind.
A few hexagons, maybe a bit like your shirt kind of appear on my shirt.
Um, just very mildly, but mostly it's white light, whiteout it's called, you see, um, quite common.
Although a friend of mine actually said he had a black, blackout, not a blackout, black vision as a word.
Um, and then very quickly, you lose your sensibility.
So you lose your hearing, you know, uh, you, uh, you, uh, you, every, you smell, um, your sight, as I say.
Um, and at this point, personally, I thought, oh shit, I've, I'm, I'm dying.
You know, I've taken too much.
This is very bad.
I've never had this experience before in the space of a few seconds.
Um, and then suddenly my thought, you know, again, again, within the space of a few seconds, my thought process was like, oh no, is this death?
I don't even know.
That's a horrible way to die, isn't it?
When you're not even sure.
And then vroom, everything's gone.
You know, um, sense of time disappears.
Your memory disappears.
Your sense of self disappears.
Um, but what, what remained, and it lasts about 10 minutes in earth time.
Um, what remained is like this extreme, extreme sense of profundity.
Um, it was like, it was an expert sort of a state.
It was so extreme.
I can't, I can hardly call it consciousness or experience.
I call it a state of existence almost, but it was just a sense of extreme importance or extreme profundity, but without an object.
It doesn't know about what, you know, because, um, and, and interesting actually, you know, in terms of philosophy of mind that you can have these, okay, let's call it experience.
You can have, um, you can have, um, experience without an object, right?
Against Brentano's famous intentionality, um, claim that, you know, all consciousness has to have an object, right?
Or, or it has to be about something.
This didn't seem to be about anything at all.
Right?
So that means you can have got, so that can't be a sort of essential mark, demarcation of consciousness.
That's another way in which psychedelics can sort of, um, facilitate philosophy of mind.
I should write one day, and I say about that, I haven't yet.
Um, anyway, so yeah, that was, uh, and then, and then, you know, slowly, about 10 minutes later, I kind of opened my eyes, slowly came out of it.
Um, luckily my friend was there saying everything's fine, everything, you know, which was a lifesaver.
I would, if you did it, if you did that alone, you'd have a panic attack, uh, um, it's like a war zone, you know, it's like, uh, extreme trauma in many ways.
Um, I don't recommend it to anyone really.
I just did it for purely academic reasons because I, because it's known as a God molecule, you know, it's, it's known as that which induces the unitive state more than anything else.
I have wanted to experience this myself, um, and I wrote, I did write about it, you know, in that book.
Um, but, um, yeah, no, that's, that's, uh, that's, uh, that's, um, that was my most extreme state.
I do, I must, I do prefer those psilocybin, um, generally because of the beautiful aesthetics and feelings that you can get from that.
Although, as you say, it can be, it's the, both the beautiful and the sublime, the terror sublime, um, that Burke talks about, you know, and that's actually another aspect you of philosophy can bring into like psychedelics, right?
The, the whole, you know, the aesthetics, aesthetic theory, right?
I've got a, I've got, um, hopefully, uh, if she gets funding, a PhD student starting soon, who's going to look at, uh, DMT aesthetics in relation to the sublime.
Uh, yeah, so there's so many different branches this could take, uh, but yeah, you mentioned that the, the self criticism within the field is starting to go to starting to grow.
Um, why do you think this is, is it just purely because some people are taking it too far as with any field, but, or, or is there some sort of plateau happening?
Do you feel like this renaissance might reach a plateau or, or will it continue to thrive in mushroom, as you said?
Yeah, I hope it continues in some form and it's not outlawed and, but, um, the reason for the kickback as well, the imminent, not implosion, but self critique is for a number of reasons.
One is some, a lot of people didn't like the medicalization of psychedelics.
So, you know, like the people who were talking about psychedelics in the nineties and the early 21st century were, you know, like former hippies or artists, you know, and, and, and so on.
And, and, um, and they didn't take it for healing, for therapy.
They took it because it was interesting, you know, artistically or intellectually interesting.
And they had their little communities and then it seems like there was a takeover by the medical community and, um, pharmaceutical companies, you know, and then obviously you see there's a lot of, then a lot of kind of, you know, Californian, um, startup companies came in and a lot of retreat centers opened and it just became kind of very commercialized as well.
And, um, and then, so that was, that was one reason for a lot of criticism, uh, my colleague, Christine Hauskeller, she talks about medicalization in, um, critical theory terms, you know, anti-capitalist terms, for example, um, another reason was that, uh, it didn't, there weren't promises.
There was like, there was like over hype to start with, and like I said, you had to get away from the kind of negative connotations that had, but it kind of pushed it too far in the other direction.
And then a lot of those promises never really happened, you know, like we'd be using MBMA in 2018 to treat PTSD or whatever, and it just didn't emerge.
It's, you know, in other countries, Australia, but, um, there's kind of a little bit of disappointment.
Um, like I said, a few bad apples, um, the Me Too movement got a few people down, um, but it's kind of inevitable.
I think, you know, with any new sort of like, um, flourishing new movement, you know, it's sort of lots of people join in and then a lot of them become disappointed.
And, uh, and then, you know, the criticism comes in and then there's, and there's also the whole thing about cultural appropriation, of course, uh, which is an interesting one because, you know, not all psychedelics are from indigenous communities.
LSD was synthesized in Switzerland, for example, uh, nitrous oxide here, MDMA, you know, so again, complex ethical issues, uh, and so on and so forth.
Uh, but yeah, no, well, one navigates through, you know, it's, it's, it's, it's like, you know, you can't expect not to have any problems whatsoever.
I mean, the biggest problem, of course, is the legal problem, still illegal, the lot of these, most of these drugs.
So to get funding for it, and, uh, even, you know, funding for trials, very expensive and a lot of hurdles to go through.
But, uh, that kind of makes it more fun, you know, more of a challenge.
Yeah, I fully agree with the overhyping, because, because the, the, those who love it, do tend to hype this up quite a bit.
To a point where it, it, it becomes too promising to, but then when you look at the data, you can see, I mean, this is very promising stuff.
In some of the fields, I know I read a few papers on psilocybin and the impacts they've had on depression rates, anxiety, et cetera.
There's still a lot of work to be done, of course, but the more work you see coming out, the more you can see the potential, at least, which should allow for some sort of curiosity.
And whether it's philosophical, ontological, there's definitely some sort of a practical significance that needs to be explored here.
And, yeah, to just completely shut it down would be pretty disappointing.
No, yeah. And also, I should just say, you know, we're going through the medical therapeutic stage now, but I see, you know, you know, in the future, it's, there's a center for minds with Bruce Damer, you know, the NASA scientists, that's just emerged and their funding, their kind of foundation to help funding, to help fund psychedelic research into creativity and innovation.
So I see that as the next step now, you know, sort of moving away a little bit from therapy, keeping that, but, you know, it's not just for the sick, it's for everyone really.
It's, I mean, it's just inherently fascinating, as I say.
Yeah, it has become quite cold because, because I think in the one study I read, it has a psychiatrist, psychologist, patients laying on a bed and puts on a blindfold and then has the trip.
I mean, that's not the most comfortable place. It's not the most calming environment, as much as we'd love to believe it is. As a doctor, I know, I know what their intention is, but really is at the best pace.
That's what I mean by like, taking incremental, careful steps. That's what's been happening. But at the same time, you know, the old 60s motto was set and setting is so important.
I mean, again, it's another consciousness question about how your environment affects your, your, your mind and, and, and your, your general moods and whatnot.
In fact, that's another very interesting aspect of psychedelic research, this old, what was once a, a debate within theology or mysticism studies between perennialism and contextualism.
You know, that so some people argue the perennialists like Huxley and maybe James and argue that, you know, although every culture interprets the peak mystical experience differently, the actual experience is the same, you know, qualitatively identical, maybe numerically identical.
Whereas the contextualist with Stephen Katzen said, no, actually your culture completely determines the consciousness that you have, you know, totally.
And, and then there's a third way, of course, about this is psychedelic research has brought back this interesting debate.
And, you know, it's a fundamental consciousness question, really, you know, like, to what extent your surroundings and your mindset actually influence your consciousness relating to, again, you know, for e-cognition and whatnot.
So, yeah, when you're having people in a little clinical room with a, with an eye mask on and seeing people over watching them, it's, it's a very particular setting, you know, that might have.
On the bright side, they've taken off the white coats, so it's the least they could do.
Tell me, Peter, at this point in your life, in your career, what part about all this work excites you the most?
And what, let's say in the next 10 years, what are you most looking forward to within the philosophy of mind and psychedelics?
I mean, I, I think what, at the moment, so this year, I spent the last few years looking downwards, as I were, into panpsychism, you know, how far down can consciousness go?
But I'm beginning to look upwards now. So I am interested, I'm going back to Hegel, and the idealist, the absolute idealist Bradley, as I keep mentioning, and I'm interested in this absolute, you know, this related psychedelics, as you were saying, there's a tendency towards this kind of absolute monism, you know, and Spinoza in relation to that.
So I'm beginning to, and classic notions of pantheism, or modern term, cosmo-psychism, that, that interests me, like basically top-down approaches to consciousness.
I'm developing what I call exogenous mind theory. So that's like, that we partake of consciousness. So, to a certain extent, seeing, just basically having that hypothesis, and seeing where it leads me.
So, both theoretically, but also interestingly, empirically. So I think, you know, certain empirical tests can be made, made for this, you know, like I said, you know, like testing brain activity in relation to certain, certain of these psychedelic experiences would be
very, very, very revealing. So that's where I'm heading at the moment.
Have you called this exogenous mind theory? Have you formalized this? Is this what you're calling it?
Yes, I've hereby formalized it.
Great. I love that.
Why can you go for that name?
I was, when I was explaining Bergson, in the, in the Masters, or the PG, so, and the PG, so that we teach here.
So I was, I was talking about how Huxley was drawing upon Bergson's theory of mind at large, and actually that's Huxley's term, mind at large and reducing valve from Bergson.
And I just wanted to sort of get across this idea that generally today we have endogenous theories of mind.
So the brain and body may be sort of generate consciousness somehow.
I think that's a default view pretty much.
But, and that's a bottom up approach, of course, right? Emergentism says it all.
But Bergson has a top down approach.
So we, we, we receive rather than generate consciousness.
So the function of the brain is to restrict and channel outside data.
So I thought, well, if you're going to call it in, you know, like the general theories of self induced consciousness, endogenous.
So from within, and that includes panpsychic, much like micro constitutive panpsychism, that is also endogenous, you know, coming from within up as it were.
What would you call the opposite, you know?
So it's going to be exogenous.
Now, having said that, I'm not taking a Bergsonian view. So, so like I said, I do like, I think some of the, I think matter of memory from Bergson is one of the greatest books of philosophy ever written, but it's, I think there's a fundamental logical flaw in his dualism.
I think a monism is just more parsimonious. So an exogenous mind theory, which is kind of monism, but it's related to absolute idealism and organic realism coming back to where I started now.
Yeah. So that's, that's what I want to develop.
Would your, would your development of this theory be more empirical based or phenomenologically based?
I think actually more theoretically based.
So at this point I just want to modernize a number of the lost philosophers of the absolute idealists and realist, new realists.
And sort of integrate a bit from other philosophers, you know, Bergson, especially maybe James.
But, but I, I, I, I, you know, at university, I do, I'm in the psychology department, you know, and not the philosophy department now.
And there are many neuroscientists and psychologists I would love to work with, you know, with regard to this.
And there's a lot of, you know, people who are very interested in funding this kind of stuff as well.
So I want to develop this theory, but I don't want it to be purely philosophical.
I want it to be, you know, amenable to testing.
If, if it's possible to be amenable to testing, that would make a very interesting essay in itself, you know, because generally, as you know, you know, the problem with empirically testing theories of mind is the alleged privacy of the mind.
Right. If the mind is private, then it's not empirical. Right.
By that, by that definition, if you accept that differentiator of consciousness, which you might not.
So how can we get around that if we need to?
So these kind of, yeah. So systematizing all these theoretical questions and then fundamentally changing the way people think, you know, normalizing what are considered strange theories of consciousness.
I think this is my goal. And actually another thing I'm involved with is this mind at large project with some Americans like Matthew Siegel, Andrew Davis, Andrew Schwartz and others.
Alex Gomez Marin. And we're creating this three year project where we're having conferences around the world, maybe starting in Exeter in winter.
And we're going to look at the history of consciousness, like why people, why we are where we are.
And then we're going to introduce, you know, sort of the rationale, the logic of these other purportedly radical theories and sort of bringing a number of people from many disciplines.
And sort of, yeah, so that's not a big project I'm working on at the moment.
If you set a date on that, please let me know.
Well, I think the first one will be December 2025 and it's probably going to be at University of Exeter.
We're just finalizing actually dates and times, but I'll let you know. Yeah, in fact.
Send me an email. I'd love to come.
I'll be there.
We're also looking for documentary filmmakers. We've got a number in mind.
So it would be like not just conferences, you know, everyone says conferences all the time, you know, it's kind of good.
There'll be conferences, workshops.
It'll be open to the public and private.
And then we'll also have proceedings, but also documentary, hopefully.
That sounds wonderful.
Literally just having a similar conversation with Stuart about his science of consciousness conference.
Like, if you just invite me, I'll be there.
Mind, body solution, cover all of it.
There was something specific I wanted to touch on before.
What were you talking about prior to this?
Drugs.
Parties.
Well, oh, yes.
What's happening next?
You said the exogenous theory.
And then I wanted to ask you, Peter, what are your views on free will?
That old one.
Yeah.
So actually, mental causation is something I'm particularly interested in.
And I see free will as a subset of that because, of course, you get psychological determinism, which is mental causation, but it's not free.
Shopping hours for you, for example.
Right.
So my general take on free will is that I think it exists to an extent.
Right.
So I think much of much what we do, most of what we do is probably determined, you know, like most of you, you know, when you walk, of course, you don't consciously make that decision to move your left foot and so on.
Right. Unless you're learning.
So obviously, you know, your language and your family upbringing and your schooling and your evolution, you know, everything helps determine your DNA.
It all helps determine how you act and whatnot.
But why do we believe, why do people not believe in free will? Well, because it's not a known force of physics, right? It's not electromagnetism, gravity or strong, weak nuclear force.
So the first thing I always say about that is, well, you know, we know they're not absolutely deterministic now with quantum theory, of course, and they're probabilistic.
Number one. Number two, with Whitehead and Hume, David Hume, you know, for we know the laws of nature might fluctuate, you know, the speed of light might change over a million years.
You know, so we can't really talk about these hard term and laws. We haven't got the right to talk about it because we cannot observe the future to test it.
Hume's problem of induction. Number one. So I don't think the laws of nature are that strict or that fixed.
And so that opens up the possibility of free will. Right. But another on the other side now, I love this argument from people like William James and Whitehead to a certain extent.
But even Karl Popper. That what would be the purpose of consciousness if it had no power, if it had no causal efficacy?
But what what would be its function? So in other words, why would it have evolved not only in human beings, but presumably amongst many organisms?
Right. Mentality. Unless you're you think only mentality adheres to human beings.
Like so. So the immediate retort to that is, well, it could be a spandrel, you know, like like the chin, for example, you know, evolved.
It doesn't play a purpose. It's kind of a side effect.
A folded space.
Yeah. But but but of course, you know, spandrels really pertain to one species, you know.
So but with consciousness, you expect, you know, you presume it's in many species and it's not vestigial, you know, hasn't it's maintained.
Not only has it evolved, it's maintained itself. So and of course, most people when you talk about like, well, why did consciousness evolve?
They'll say, oh, yeah. So we could sort of, you know, differentiate berries from the leaves or something like that.
Or we, you know, like when we're thirsty, it's our body's way of telling us to drink and or our intelligence has caused us to create civilization and technology and whatever.
Right. Most people, most scientists would accept this, you know, that consciousness there is mental causation.
It plays a role. So there's evolution, good evolutionary reasons for for mental causation.
So I'm generally in favor of it. But but I mean, another aspect of it, of course, is, you know, if you have you ever read, I mean, one of the greatest philosophers, I think, of the last few years is Jaegwon Kim, you know,
he's got, you know, he he presents the exclusion problem really well problem and emergentism in relation to mental causation.
When I say mental causation, though, I really mean, as a panpsychist, I mean, physical, I mean, psychophysical to psychophysical causation, because if you're a monist or a panpsychist,
it's essentially the same thing, I think, then there's not like a mental to mental and mental to physical causation.
Right. If if these the mental and physical, if we're not dualists, we're monists, then there's only that lateral causation.
And that and that that makes the most sense to me.
Yeah. So essentially. I do believe in a limited free will.
OK, do you have a. Has anyone ever asked you if you have a solution to the combination problem, how do you address it?
Yeah. So the combination problem really is a problem for a panpsychism that has emerged in the last few decades with Galen Strauss and Philip Goff and people like that.
Yeah. But the. But if you take a pan experientialist type of panpsychism, you realize that combination is at the very heart of reality.
Right. The fundamental. So the fundamental entities for Whitehead are actual entities, also known as actual occasions or events.
And they are they are prehensive, like I mentioned. So in other words, the immediate past flows into and becomes immediate present.
So the drops of experience, but they are constituted by the outside.
This is a kind of extended mind theory. Right. Not only the immediate past, but the immediate surroundings as well.
So at the very fundamental base, as it were, of reality, you get combination. Right.
That's what prehension is. It's combination. And so the combination problem doesn't arise because that is the sort of axiomatic basis of that metaphysics.
The reason for it is partly for logical reasons, though, that you can't really.
If you didn't presume that, then you would, as it were, break up reality into units which kind of succeed each other.
This Whitehead calls the fallacy of simple location.
And so he says, you know, like when we think of an entity like an atom, we think of it, we conceptualize it as a single entity.
But really, it's completely related to its outside environment.
Genes likewise. In fact, that that hypothesis led to the development of epigenetics for Waddington.
You know, that a gene expression genes is related to its surroundings.
And the same applies to instance in time, you know, an instance of times is an abstraction as a conception, really.
You know, like your flow and the past, as it were, flows into and constitutes present.
But in other words, it's a kind of logical way of understanding time and causation and perception as prevention, which therefore means that fundamental reality is relational.
That's why it's called process relational philosophy.
And another word for relational is combitorial, you know, that combinations are the very essence of things, because without that, if you weren't, if you didn't believe that, you think everything's isolated in nature.
And somehow there's some kind of third relations that relate everything together.
So instead of sort of interweaving processes, you get this kind of, yeah, kind of discrete atomic universe.
So the deep mental, if you think about, you know, reality on this deep metaphysical level, then that gets rid of the combination problem if you're a Whiteheadian panpsychist, also known as pan experientialist.
He didn't come up with that term, by the way.
Griffin did.
But, you know, it works well.
He's defined as panpsychist as well.
And at this point, cosmopsychist, well, it's what you slowly trying to.
I'm going up there.
Yeah, I'm beginning.
Getting higher and higher.
Yeah, exactly.
How high can you go?
There you go.
That's good.
Let's just go all the way.
Now, I'm not saying I believe it.
Like I say, I entertain ideas rather than believe them.
But I think it's a very interesting idea that there's, you know, at the moment with panpsychism, it's just the external world is conscious, but it's like units, as it were, of consciousness that do combine.
But how about if there's some more unified consciousness out there?
You know, that's an interesting question.
And it's not completely implausible.
I think the only danger is you go into, you know, religion, you know, you call it God, but you know, you call it cosmopsychism.
It sounds quite formal.
Most idealist theories eventually go down to that route.
Yeah.
At some point, it tends to hit that sweet spot.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Some people call it love.
Some people call it the one.
Some people call it God.
But it tends to get to that point.
I realize I derailed us a bit, but you mentioned exogenous mind theory.
And then you also mentioned mind at large, this conference, which hopefully I'll attend.
But you're most welcome.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The, what, in conclusion, this conversation has been absolutely wonderful.
Thank you so much.
The, there's so much work that you're doing so much overlap between philosophy of mind, philosophy
of psychedelics.
What else in terms of the next few years are you looking forward to, except for those two aspects
we just discussed, any concluding thoughts, anything you wish that you, you'd like to say.
As a concluding remark, take as much time as you want, actually.
I mean, you mean academically or generally?
Academically.
Academically.
I mean, I'm, I'm, I'm always interested in history as well.
And I, I always think that history can inform philosophy.
You know, this is actually the British idealists were really into history to fully understand
something you have to really contextualize it.
So I do, I always am aiming to increase my historical knowledge.
Um, that's one thing I'm pursuing.
I'm looking at plasma physics now.
Um, seems quite interesting.
Something else I'm slowly getting into.
Um, oh yeah, no, actually another very important new direction I'm going is, um, the relationship
between metaphysics and politics.
I think it's very fascinating.
It's related to why we believe what we believe now, but just the way, for example, Marx turned
away from Hegel's dialectical idealism saying that it was bourgeois thing, you know, and, um,
the way that, the way that, you know, like we moved away from idealism because of the war.
Partly.
There's this great book I read on actually by, by, um, John, John, uh, Mearhead.
I think it's pronounced German philosophy in relation to the war from 1918, you know, first
world war.
Um, just, just quite fascinating.
So I'm looking at that relationship, getting a bit more political, you know, have to be
dangerous again, politics and religion.
I shouldn't speak about that really, but, but that's, but that's my trajectory.
It's just, you're just a trailblazer.
You go against the status quo.
I love it.
I think it's, it's, um, it's one of the best ways, uh, without people like you doing that,
nobody's going to do it and the work will not get done.
Right.
Yeah.
Somebody's got to do it.
Exactly.
Yeah.
It's my, my hard life.
No, no, like I say, I can't complain.
It's, um, you know, I, I always aim to be, get a job, be getting paid to do philosophy
in psychedelics.
And that happens.
So I'm happy.
I'm happy.
Hmm.
Well, my first, my first, uh, aim actually was to be a rock star.
It didn't work out.
It's plan B.
It's still time at the conference.
You can always show them your skills.
I don't have any skills.
That was the problem you see.
I see.
Okay.
So that's a bit problematic.
Listen, Peter, this has been such a wonderful conversation.
I appreciate all the work you're doing.
And, uh, this was really cool, man.
Thanks.
I really, thanks for your questions.
Great time.
Thank you.
Um, I hope we can have a, some chats at regarding your exogenous theory of mind at some point.
And let's see where this goes and dissecting further in the future.
Yeah.
Thanks.
Yeah.
No, I, I have got a draft, a word file where I'm sort of, um, just, just, just, um, yeah.
Yeah.
When people ask me like you, you know, what do you really believe?
Then I thought, okay, I'll just need to form those a little bit.
Yeah.
So that'll be my book after this metaphysics psychedelics one, I think.
Yeah.
I'm looking forward to it very much.
Thank you.
Once again, any final words, Peter, anything you feel like you want to clarify, you should
have said, didn't say, said, and want to correct.
I feel like I haven't spoken about Spinoza enough.
Um, because I'm a, I do admire his work, um, almost more than anyone else, but, um, I was
about to ask you, who's your, who would you put on the top of that list instead of saving
them from falling on that, from that cliff, who is your favorite, but.
Well, Spinoza.
Um, well, I, I, I, I think I focused on a few philosophers.
So Spinoza, Whitehead, Nietzsche, Nietzsche more in the past now, Schopenhauer, I'm getting
him more and more into Bradley, F.H. Bradley, a lost philosopher.
Fantastic.
I mean, his chapter against solipsism in appearance and reality is, I gave it to Christoph Koch in
Philadelphia a few months ago, because he said, you know, solipsism is just something that you
have to assume, you know, you can't, you can't question it, but, um, you can move on.
You know, there's actually, no, you can question it.
It's like, it's not at all a logical necessity.
Right.
And, and Bradley's the best critic of that.
So getting back into his work, um, Bergson intrigues me as well.
So, although I don't, I'm not a dualist, um, maybe he's not a dualist.
Um, there's just so much you can, you can take from Bergson, just really fascinating insights.
And it's a completely different way of thinking, you know, that's what Bergson is.
And let's get back to Spinoza.
What about him has changed your life and the way you perceive this entire field?
Um, I think, uh, just, I just love the way he writes, you know, this geometric method,
axioms, propositions, you know, corollaries and stuff like that.
Um, number one, number two, essentially what Spinoza offers is a very simple thing.
Yeah.
It's simple monism that, um, there's one substance as opposed to Descartes too.
Um, but mind and matter, Descartes too, are just expressions or attributes of that one substance.
That creates then a panpsychism.
That one substance he calls nature at the same time, cause it God.
So that's a pantheism and, um, just beautifully parsimonious.
You know, like I say, the only thing I don't like about it is it's not, um, transitory.
It's not developmental and that was Hegel's critique of it.
So in a way like Hegel took Spinoza, Spinoza's philosophy and sort of just got it rolling,
you know, um, Nietzsche said without Hegel, there would be no Darwin, you know?
Um, but I think Hegel went a bit straight.
Um, I'm also, I should say rereading Hegel.
I had the most amazing teacher of Hegel in, in Warwick university, Stephen Holgate.
He's like what leading scholar, you know, just such an inspiration.
Um, we called him Hegel by accident quite often, Holgate, because he was sick.
He was so, he still is.
I mean, um, just so adamant about the correctness of Hegel and, and so inspiring.
And so I'm going back to Hegel now.
Um, but partly that it's only to understand where we are now.
Um, Hegel's very difficult to get into.
Um, but I think quite rewarding for, you know, ultimately.
I'm also looking at the other, you know, idealists like Fichte and Schilling.
I did my, I'm going back to the beginning.
I did my master's dissertation on, um, intellectual intuition in Kant's first critique
and Schilling's system of transcendental idealism, some sort of,
it was like 20 years ago.
So I was sort of spinning back on that somehow.
I still think there's like a lot of insights there that I just lost.
Right.
And there's just so much, you can take the treasure tree.
There's like that, that part of German history, you know, like in the early, late 1700s, early 1800s,
just quite amazing.
Really.
When you look back.
Um, yeah.
So, but also, yeah, I'm, I'm really, it's really fun, uh, speaking to like psychedelic neuroscientists
and scientists because they're very open-minded to, to metaphysics.
You know, that's a surprising thing.
They're not hardcore materialists as, as you might expect, you know, the Chris Timmerman, for example,
who I've, I'm going to London to speak with him on, uh, mysticism publicly at UCL, um, in a couple of weeks.
Uh, he, he, he told me to read, um, The Blind Spot, you know, by, um, Evan Thompson and two others.
Right.
Uh, he's an, an activist, I believe.
You know, he was last time I spoke to him.
So yeah.
Yeah.
Right.
Um, so anyway, like the interesting, the great thing is really is that it's just.
The fact of the matter is scientists, of course, they can't, I haven't got time to read philosophy.
They don't know about it.
And just like, I don't know about quantum theory.
So, so it's just nice to sort of have these conversations and, um, and that people are very open to it, generally speaking.
Yeah.
I've, I've noticed that even with this podcast, it's, it's really cool to see the diversity of thought around these topics and the openness to now learn more about the different fields.
It seems like everybody is starting to take this a little bit more seriously in terms of a philosophical framing of all these problems.
And, and there seems to be a resurgence of not only just psychedelic research, but philosophy in general is becoming a bit more appreciated over time.
And that's why this is a philosophy podcast.
Yes.
Yeah.
And metaphysics as well.
You know, we're going through a metaphysical turn.
I think people are just being, you know, like returning to it.
It's like, oh, shit, we've got this whole history.
We don't have to turn to the East or whatever.
Although the East is quite fascinating in itself.
But, um, yeah, no, and you're doing a good job.
I mean, I'm a big fan of this podcast, as I said to you a year after responding to email.
So, yeah, it's really interesting.
I, you know, when I drive to Exeter, I generally listen to this podcast.
Oh, man, that's, that's, that's so heartwarming.
And it means a lot to me.
Thank you so much.
No problem.
Yeah.
And now it's, it's a pleasure for me to host you.
And at least this time you can.
Maybe one day you'll listen to your own episode, but of Peter.
Peter, thank you.
This is, this has been awesome.
And, um, I look forward to watching your journey and hopefully you continue to enjoy the podcast
on your drives to Exeter.
I'm sure I will.
And I look forward to seeing you next to them.
Yeah.
I mean, I've never been, I've never been to the UK.
So I've been everywhere else, I think, except maybe South America and the UK.
I think not God's country.
Right.
Okay.
Well, if you're ever in Cape town, South Africa, come, you can come visit me.
Yeah, actually, I've got a good friend from Cape town.
So I do need to go there one day.
When you do.
I'm not going to do it.
We'll try and host a, a consciousness conference in Cape town.
Cool.
Cheers Peter.
Thanks so much.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
