The crypto industry raised $200 million in this election.
The crypto industry is not normally a big spender in politics, and that was more money
than some of the biggest historical political donors.
And now we've sort of seen the results of that, which is that there is a crypto czar
at the White House, and it's a venture capitalist named David Sachs.
There is this crypto council being formed, which is advising regulators like the SEC
on the new political or the new regulatory agenda.
And it just so happens that those advisors are all CEOs of cryptocurrency companies.
We're seeing announcements from Donald Trump himself about the establishment of a crypto
strategic reserve or a digital asset stockpile, where the only justification for such a maneuver
has been quite plainly to benefit the crypto industry.
Hello, and welcome to Planet Critical, the podcast for a world in crisis.
My name is Rachel Donald.
I'm a climate corruption journalist and your host.
Every week I interview experts who are battling to save our planet.
My guests are scientists, politicians, academics, journalists, and activists.
They explain the complexities of the energy, economic, political, and cultural crises we face
today, revealing what's really going on and what they think needs to be done.
These are the stories of the big picture.
Go to planetcritical.com to learn more and subscribe.
My guest this week is Molly White.
Molly is a researcher, software engineer, and writer investigating the tech industry.
She writes the independent newsletter Citation Needed, which helps readers keep up with what's
happening in the tech industry.
She runs the website Web3 is Going Just Great, where she highlights examples of how cryptocurrencies,
Web3 projects, and the industry surrounding them are failing to live up to their promises.
And she also runs Follow the Crypto, tracking cryptocurrency industry spending in United States elections.
And that's just the tip of the iceberg, really, on what Molly does and what she has achieved,
including advising policymakers around the crypto industry.
And she joins me today for a wide-ranging conversation on what's happening in tech,
how that's influencing American politics, what that means for people around the world,
and how we can democratize our information systems.
We begin by discussing the radical political agenda of tech billionaires and how they've managed
to insert themselves into politics.
Molly then explains how the cryptocurrency industry in particular influenced the 2024
American election, revealing why lawmakers are supporting the industry, and also the profits
that Trump and his family themselves are making off of cryptocurrency.
We then examine the ideological failures of tech billionaires and their political puppets,
with Molly revealing the vision that they have for the future, including the absolute attack
on free and open-access public information, whether that's going after physical spaces like
libraries or online spaces like Wikipedia.
Molly explains that these men simply fail to understand why having an educated public is
important and valuable, that they don't understand value outside of dollar signs.
And also, of course, that with regards to dismantling democracy and inserting an authoritarian regime,
it's far more beneficial to them to have a deliberately undereducated populace.
And this leads us into a conversation more broadly about value, ending on a discussion of
the Wikipedia model, which, Molly says, shows that human beings are kind and generous and
curious, that they are grateful when valuable things are free and they are happy to support
projects even if they could just exploit them for free, and that we could create information
systems and knowledge systems based on that model.
But doing so under capitalism is particularly difficult.
And so how can we create alternatives that don't just support ourselves, but actively challenge
and protest against the enclosure of the web, of knowledge, of information, and, of course,
our rights?
I hope you all enjoy the episode.
If you do, please share it far and wide.
And if you're loving the show, become a patron on Patreon or support Planet Critical with a
paid subscription at planetcritical.com.
By signing up, you'll get the Planet Critical newsletter inspired by each episode delivered
straight to your inbox every week.
You'll also have access to the wonderful Planet Critical community who are full of inspiring
thoughts, ideas, critiques, and determination.
The links are in the description box below.
I'm so grateful to everyone who chooses to support the project.
I'm a vehement believer in ad-free and open access content, so Planet Critical wouldn't exist
without the direct support of the amazing community.
Thank you so much to all of you who believe in Planet Critical and keep the project going
every week.
Molly, thank you very much for joining me on Planet Critical.
It is a pleasure to have you on the show.
Pleasure to be here.
My first question for you, why is the world in crisis?
Well, I think there are a lot of reasons that the world is in crisis and it's hard to sort
of just name one.
But I think that one thing that we have really been grappling with lately is this idea that,
you know, business is the epitome of efficiency and productivity and that everything should be
modeled around business, especially tech business, you know, we've recently seen
the adoption of the historic tech mantra, move fast, break things being applied everywhere and
anywhere, including in the U.S.
government now, and the idea that, you know, these tech CEOs are these genius figures who
not only are capable of running a tech company, but are capable of dictating, you know, political
strategy and advising and somewhat running the government.
You know, there's always been this historical lionization, I think, of these tech billionaires
that is largely undeserved.
But people look to them and sort of respect their opinions on many things that they have
really no expertise in.
You know, I think one of the biggest moments for me when I was realizing this was during the
COVID pandemic when suddenly, you know, billionaire tech CEOs were styling themselves as experts
on epidemiology and, you know, social strategies around containing a pandemic or, you know, whether
or not masks were effective or whatever it might be.
And, you know, I was like, why are we listening to this guy whose claim to fame is, you know,
often inheriting some money from, you know, a family member and then starting a tech business
that goes bankrupt and then, you know, eventually getting an investment from a Y Combinator
accelerator and, you know, making their way from there.
But, you know, this has really spread throughout much of the, you know, society at this point
where now we have Ewan Musk, you know, in the highest office essentially trying to say
that, you know, the U.S. government should be run like a business and taking the Twitter
approach to the U.S. government where he goes in and fires everybody and, you know, rips
the copper cabling out of the walls.
This is connected to, I've heard, I've heard about it and obviously we don't have to talk
about it because I did get you on to talk about your technological expertise, but just
on the off chance that you might know a bit about this, this is all connected to dark, dark
enlightenment, isn't it?
This Peter Thiel thing?
Is there anything you can speak to about that?
Yeah.
I mean, I think that Peter Thiel is sort of this weird, well, he is very weird, but this
sort of weird force in American politics, as well as obviously in the tech sector where,
you know, he has established himself as this lord in the tech world who chooses
usually young men as, you know, almost like sun figures that he supports and sort of grooms
through their tech journeys in business journeys and through those avenues sort of molds them
in his shape and uses them to pursue his political agenda, which is frankly very radical
and based in, you know, these very sort of right libertarian ideals.
And we've seen that with, you know, in the tech sector with figures like Sam Altman and,
you know, other sort of Thiel protégés.
But then we've also seen it in politics with J.D. Vance, for example, who was, you know,
basically, if you look through his resume, Peter Thiel is there at every step of the way.
And so, you know, he is this figure who is, you know, maybe less these days outspoken
personally about politics, but has an enormous degree of influence from behind the scenes,
essentially through these tech-adjacent figures and is sort of using those to pursue his political goals.
And is this the political goal that links into what you were saying earlier about running a government
like a tech business, that we should have a kind of monarchy CEO figure making sort of unquestionable
decisions in order to speed run development or growth or whatever other kind of lame goals that
they're ascribing to their political ideals in order to no doubt shoehorn something else in along the way?
Yeah, I mean, I think that, you know, the authoritarianism and, you know, sort of raising of one figure
to absolute power is a very sort of efficient way to pursue their political goals. And so, you know,
by installing people who are pursuing that agenda and then elevating them to this sort of absolute
unquestionable power, they are able to then pursue, you know, these, again, very extreme goals
around how they believe America should look and, you know, the way that America should run,
which is coincidentally very lucrative for them and, you know, establishes their place as these sort of
secondary kings, essentially, under the authoritarian rule.
It always boggles my mind.
And I wrote about this recently because the great contradiction or irony in all of this is that,
like, this system works very well for these people. It's just, it's just uncontrollable greed that is
making them go, I bet if we dismantled it and put it back together, we could squeeze even more money
out of this. Like, what else do you need, lads? You've got multiple private jets, multiple homes,
you own islands, you're already, like, you know, you've got your foot on the neck of, you know,
some political figures who are making massive decisions globally. Like, what else do you want?
There is a finite amount of stuff on the world. Where are you going with this? That's, that's almost
where I get to.
Yeah, I mean, I think that there is maybe this fatal flaw among humans where we often try to
humanize people like this a little bit, where we go, like, well, if I had a billion dollars, like,
you know, like, for me, you don't even need a billion dollars. But like, if I had,
I don't know, a couple million dollars, you would never see me again, right? Like,
it would be gone. It would be on an island, you know, I would be like, I'd have like an animal
shelter, you know, like, everyone thinks that way of themselves, because like, most of us are pretty
normal people who are not chasing extreme wealth, you know, we are, we are looking to secure enough
for us, you know, ourselves to live and, you know, to provide for our families and so on. Most of us
don't have dreams like Peter Thiel's dreams or Elon Musk's dreams or Donald Trump's dreams. And so when
we sort of try to project ourselves on them and say, like, what, what could they want? You know,
why do they need more money when they already have more money than any human alive? You know,
we, I think we're doing that. But it's very clear from Elon Musk's behavior and the behavior of those
like him that that's not what they're looking for. It's not that, oh, once he hits, you know,
a trillion dollars, he'll finally be happy and he'll go spend the rest of his days on a beach somewhere.
He could be doing that now. He could have been doing that a hundred billion dollars ago,
you know, many hundreds of billions of dollars ago, because that's not what drives him. You know,
for him, it's, it's, it's power. It's shaping the world in the image that he has in his head,
you know, these fantasies of this perfect, you know, sci-fi future. And in those fantasies,
he is the king, you know, he is the guy pulling the strings that everybody admires that everyone,
you know, warships, essentially. And that's a very different thing than, you know, what you or I
think of success to be, because most people are not egomaniacs, essentially. Yeah, that is such a
good point. And I think one that we're kind of still grappling with how there is now like this
opportunity for wealth to equal power one for one, in a sense, whereas before due to regulation,
due to the law, due to other things, and even due to like old money, and the fact that new money
wasn't quite as wealthy as old money, you know, there was an almost a, a, oh, what's the word?
This would be such a good segment if I could remember the word. A discoupling of like wealth
and power to an extent. And now it's like they're really, really coupling again. Like now is the
opportunity for the billionaires of the world to truly fashion themselves as kings, as you say,
and not just be free to kind of do what they want as much as their money will buy them, but free to
pursue what they want and free to dismantle what they want and free to break what they want and free
to kind of have people treat them exactly in the way that they deserve. And I think that's what's kind
of particular about this moment in history and with the kind of collusion, or collision rather,
of the Trump and Musk regime. And I think that's also why we're seeing billionaires around the world
like just quite suddenly fall in line in a way that maybe the different didn't in 2016. Some of them
did. But there's something happening that's different this time, isn't there?
Yeah, I mean, I don't want to sort of, you know, put on the rose-colored glasses too much,
because I think that wealth and power have always been very tightly linked and, you know, and there
that, you know, it is off. It has long been sort of wealthy people dictating how things go in the
government. But I do think you're right that there is much it's much more overt now where, you know,
it's happening right in front of us. You know, we're seeing Elon Musk spending massive amounts of
money to buy entry into Donald Trump's, you know, closest circle. We're seeing crypto companies
doing the very same where they spent, you know, $130 million on the single election and are now
essentially writing the rules for their own industry. And so, you know, it is happening very,
very overtly. And with no even sort of glancing acknowledgement of the laws or regulations that
perhaps once were intended to, you know, put some speed bumps in the way, I suppose you could say.
Yeah, absolutely. I think because you've mentioned crypto, this is a good time to maybe like focus
our analysis here. And what I really want to ask you about to kick us off, because I think this is
such a good kind of segue, is that piece you wrote very recently, I think within the last week,
about Sam Bankman-Fried. And he's sort of doing what a whole bunch of these guys are doing,
that he's sort of gunning for a pardon. Can you explain to people that may not know,
who the fuck is Sam Bankman-Fried and why is he in prison? And what does this speak to about the
crypto industry? Yes. So Sam Bankman-Fried was the CEO of a company called FTX, which was a
cryptocurrency exchange that went bankrupt in 2022 after basically completely falling apart at the
end of a sort of protracted collapse in the crypto industry, where many, many businesses went under,
crypto prices tanked. And it turned out that Sam Bankman-Fried and those at his company had been
taking customer funds from the exchange that they were supposed to just be holding on their behalf,
and using them to do their own trading, essentially gambling with customer money to try to make a
profit at this sister company that was a trading firm, which as it happens is illegal, or at least was a
year or two ago. And so there was a prosecution and Sam Bankman-Fried was eventually convicted on
mostly fraud charges and sentenced to 25 years in prison for essentially losing $8 billion in customer
funds or thereabouts. The number is a little bit fuzzy, but you know, a massive amount of money basically
was squandered and used for purposes it was not supposed to be. And so he's been in prison for a
year or so now, you know, very early into a very long sentence and has recently begun angling for
pardon from Donald Trump as is in vogue. And it's been a very interesting sort of story to watch because
Sam Bankman-Fried is claiming that his prosecution was not about fraud. It was not about the many crimes for
which he was convicted. It was a Democratic campaign to go after him because he was contributing
politically to support Republicans, which is particularly sort of bold of him because he was a
Democratic mega donor. He was one of the largest supporters of Joe Biden, one of the single like
largest single supporters. He was known as this sort of up and coming Democratic political, you know,
powerhouse, but he was secretly or, you know, semi secretly contributing to Republicans as well.
And this was actually also a part of the criminal case, although it sort of got split out, but he was
illegally making contributions through straw donors and so on. And you know, sort of later came out
through the trial that he was contributing massive amounts of money also to Republicans. And so
Bankman-Fried has now tried to essentially latch on to that fact to claim that he was being politically
persecuted in ways that he thinks will appeal to Donald Trump's own, you know, sort of beliefs in that
sector. And I think he hopes that Trump will issue a pardon based on Trump's own many claims around
democratic sort of weaponization of the legal system and so on.
Now, why would Donald Trump give a flying fuck about somebody in the crypto industry? Because this
is something that with all of their flooding the zone, this, you know, technique of releasing bad news
news that was kind of, you know, particularly weaponized by Putin's regime, is kind of going
under the radar. And even before he was elected, Trump's relationship with crypto was almost going
under the radar. But it's happening everywhere. I mean, it's Donald Trump and his cronies that have
floated ideas of like, you know, a crypto reserve currency and who the fuck knows what that means.
There's also, you know, their massive sort of coalition of enemies, although that's also
increasingly unclear under Trump, you know, BRICS, Brazil, Russia, India, China, Saudi Arabia,
you know, they've all, not Saudi Arabia, sorry, another one. They also are talking about releasing
a BRICS coin as a currency to trade in, so they don't have to trade in the US dollar to upseat the
sort of the dollar's hegemony. Like what's going on? I mean, it's crazy because it seems like this
kind of push to crypto came after the mainstream or perhaps the tech industry kind of went, oh,
this stuff's dodgy. We're going to leave it alone. We don't want anything to do with it.
How is it that governments are now deciding to kind of throw their lot in with this shite?
Yeah, I mean, there was this very sudden sort of whiplash when it came to crypto.
And I think that's really important to note, you know, if we go back to 2022,
when crypto prices had tanked, a ton of people had lost a ton of money. Many, many crypto businesses
went under, often taking customer funds with them, essentially, where, you know, people who had put
money into crypto and kept it on these exchanges or other platforms were suddenly unable to access
that money. And in many cases, it was money that they really needed. You know, it was devastating
to people. Of course, there was the FTX fraud where a ton of people lost money. And there was
this very brief period of time where lawmakers were saying, we can't let this happen again.
We need to regulate the cryptocurrency industry and ensure that there are not these fraudulent
actors that, you know, consumers are being protected adequately. And there was sort of this moment of hope
that, you know, some people thought, Oh, crypto is dead, because so many people had seen that the
catastrophes and said, I don't want anything to do with that. And other people said, Oh, well, crypto is
finally going to be, you know, properly regulated, so that those who do decide they want to get involved
with, you know, risky digital asset speculation, or at least doing so with a full understanding of, you
know, what they're getting into, and, you know, auditing and proper transparency, you know, there
was some hope there. And then it felt like very, very quickly, that suddenly disappeared. And the crypto
industry was pushing this narrative that Americans love crypto, actually. And, you know, didn't you know,
that there is this huge, you know, segment of American people and voters who are just waiting
to support candidates who fall in line with the crypto industry. And then we were seeing Congress
people talking about how the crypto industry was so maligned by regulators and that the regulators
were not, you know, it suddenly went from where were the regulators? Why didn't the regulators prevent
FTX from happening to the story that the regulators have killed the crypto industry and that they were doing
too much enforcement and that they should be, you know, fired and, you know, removed from the beat,
essentially, because they would have been too aggressive towards the crypto industry. And it felt
like that happened very, very quickly. And so now and now we're seeing, you know, the further sort of
development of that push, which is that after, you know, this unprecedented degree of political spending
from the crypto industry, which I really cannot underscore enough. I mean, the crypto industry
raised $200 million in this election and the crypto industry is not normally a big spender in politics,
or they haven't been at least. And that was more money than some of the biggest, you know, historical
political donors. You know, you think of a big pharma or big oil or, you know, whatever industry,
the crypto industry, which is a very small industry compared to say, the energy sector,
where, you know, pharmaceuticals or healthcare, the crypto industry eclipsed that out of nowhere,
and suddenly was engaged in this sort of full frontal campaign to install crypto friendly politicians
throughout, you know, congressional races, essentially just sort of parachuting into these elections,
and, you know, suddenly people were talking about crypto in elections where, you know, constituents
were like, what are we talking about crypto? I care about the price of groceries and, you know,
whether or not, you know, my immigrant neighbors are going to be protected. But, you know, now we've
sort of seen the the results of that, which is that there is a crypto czar at the White House,
and it's a venture capitalist named David Sachs. You know, there is this crypto council being formed,
which is advising regulators like the SEC on the new political or the new regulatory agenda. And it
just so happens that those advisors are all CEOs of cryptocurrency companies. And so, and, you know,
we're seeing announcements from Donald Trump himself about the establishment of a crypto strategic
reserve or digital asset stockpile, where the only justification for such a maneuver has been quite
plainly to benefit the crypto industry. I mean, they have been very explicit that this is for the
crypto industry, almost as a thank you, you know, for the degree of political support, with no mention
or even attempts to explain how this would be beneficial to the American public in general,
or how this would, you know, sort of benefit the goals of the country such as they are.
So then how does it benefit Trump and his regime? Because this is what I can't quite marry in my
head. I mean, first of all, I can't quite imagine him understanding what crypto is, which is maybe how
all of this has happened. I'm not sure if he did understand it, if it would be any different. But I
do think you're right that he doesn't. And then to how this, yeah, how they're marrying this. I just
don't get it. Why? Why bother? Well, I think I think it's a couple of things. For one, crypto has been
very lucrative for Donald Trump personally. And there, you know, that has historically been a great
way to get Trump to support something is if it makes a lot of money for him. What's he done with it?
Yeah, sorry, quite a lot. And he so he is he started by launching his own entities, which were
these sort of like trading cards depicting him wearing like superhero outfits and stuff. It was
really very grim. And those those medium, you know, a couple million dollars, which, you know,
and it were very little effort on his part. And I think that was sort of his entry point into the
crypto world. From there, he became involved in a project called World Liberty Financial, which is a
crypto platform essentially that is run by some of his close associates. And he and his family members
are his several of his sons are advisors to this project, and they receive 75% of platform revenue.
So they're essentially directly profiting from a crypto platform. Then shortly before his
inauguration, Trump launched a meme coin. I think which was, I think you might have to explain for a
meme coin. Yeah. So a meme coin is essentially a crypto asset boiled down to like, it's very basis form,
where there really is no point to it. It just sort of represents an idea or, you know, like an internet
meme or a person or, you know, some concept, but there's no business there. There's no sort of
future plans for the, you know, token to be used in some way. It's really just people, you know,
know that the initial excitement around a meme coin and whatever, you know, news coverage or virality
they can generate will cause people to purchase it, which will cause the price to go up. And so if they
are able to buy in early enough, they might be able to sell it later for a profit. And that is all there is
to it essentially. And so Trump, um, launched his own meme coin, you know, shortly before the election,
um, which was very profitable to him and to some very early buyers. But the thing about meme coins
is that when those early buyers sell, they need someone to buy from them at a higher price. Those
tend to be the sort of everyday people who get in late and who do not have, you know, in some cases
with meme coins insider information that would allow them to buy early, um, or, you know,
sophisticated and trading bots and things like that, that allow them to purchase the token,
like literally before it would be possible for a human being to do so.
Yeah. Um, or, you know, in, in the case of Trump, a lot of these were people who are not familiar with
crypto, who are trying to figure out how to buy a, a Trump meme coin to support their favorite president.
Um, and so those people essentially supply the exit liquidity for the early people who made a lot
of money and those people who bought in very late and often at the peak of the price have now lost
essentially all the value or, or a substantial amount of the value that they put in because the,
the token price declines after that initial sale and has continued to decline since.
Um, so, I mean, those are just a number of ways he's, he's also his, uh, Trump media company,
which runs his truth social platform has recently announced plans to get into crypto very heavily.
Um, so he's very directly benefiting financially from crypto. Um, but you know, I think that's just
one reason for this. I think also the, the goals of the crypto industry, and I would say the much
broader tech industry as well. And in many ways, we're seeing a lot of tech executives,
um, doing similar things as a crypto industry who are, you know, they're not crypto executives,
but we're seeing Mark Zuckerberg or, you know, um, various other figures sort of fall in line with
the Trump administration. I think the goals of those people are fairly aligned with the goals of Trump.
And so by allying himself with these incredibly wealthy people who hold a, a significant degree
of power in the sense that they control some of the biggest tech companies in the, um, you know,
used by the American public and, you know, um, for example, Musk, you know, runs Twitter or X,
which is where a lot of conversation happens around, um, you know, politics. He's, he's, you know,
making alliances with media professionals and, and those who own major media companies. You know,
I think by doing this, he is able to really cement power around himself, um, and around these allies
of his, uh, in ways that are sort of mutually beneficial. I wonder if you'd like to do like,
maybe a little bit of speculating with me, uh, because, um, you know, we've all noticed the
gutting of government services, uh, and even things like the wet, the nether weather service
and the national public radio, and, um, they're sort of taking a machete to everything that is
directly funded. I believe it's a chainsaw.
Oh, I apologize. Sorry. Of course it would be something that demands, uh, oil as its fuel,
rather than elbow grease. Yeah. Okay. They're taking a chainsaw to these things that are funded
by the public and are meant to provide a direct service. And I mean, with the weather, the weather
service in particular, I mean, you know, I exist on blue sky rather than Twitter now. And that was
the thing that really kind of got my corner of the internet aflame, like seeing the, the projections
that they'd made of like how much it was worth because it is so valuable to the American public,
especially as the weather is going to become more extreme under climate change, the fact that they
were selling off to the highest bidder essentially. Um, and what I'm particularly frightened of happening
is that essentially like the whole idea of paying a tax, like a state tax and a federal tax becomes,
uh, well, sort of India and ancient becomes obsolete. Sorry. And it's replaced by paying a subscription
to a series of tech billionaires. So whether that's being forced to hold, you know, uh,
cryptocurrency in order to have some relationship with the federal reserve or the bank or whatever,
uh, whether it's all, you know, national media disappearing and being forced to subscribe to
multiple different media platforms that will just continuously hike their prices as we've already
seen. Um, whether that is, you know, paying, uh, a subscription charge to like, I don't know,
it could be anything, couldn't it? Because once the weather app,
Yeah. The weather app or like, you know, your electricity, the, you know, bills of that going
up or like just whatever, because the whole point is like, once they catch you then, and, and they
annihilate the competition, there's nowhere else to go. And I'm just so frightened of that becoming
increasingly, you know, our, our public services. And there's a precedent for that as well. I mean,
especially in the United States, like the fact that your healthcare is private is, is wild. Um, but we're
really deep in the subscription age now, to the point where it's, it's sort of becoming normal to
have like $200 exit your bank account for very similar services, because there's nowhere else to
go anymore. That's collective or, like, adhesive or, or publicly owned. And so, I mean, what's the
direction of, of travel for that? Do you think with, is this something that the tech industry wants?
Absolutely. I mean, I think, I think you're actually spot on there that, you know, there has
been, and this, this circles back to sort of my original answer to your question, which is this idea
that everything should be run like a tech business. Yeah. Um, the government should be run by a tech
business. The, the people, you know, the Elon Musk's and the Donald Trump's and the, you know, the people
who are in power and, and, um, you know, dictating this direction don't understand fundamentally
why we would spend money on something that is not profitable. And that is completely foreign to
them, you know, and you see it with their attacks on the postal service, for example, um, recent attacks
on libraries. Yeah. The idea that we would spend money to allow people to access information or
knowledge, and there's no profit, you know, libraries are not generating a profit for the
government. Um, it's like, they don't understand why that would ever be worth doing. They can't see
the value of something if there isn't a dollar sign before it, even though having libraries or
a functioning postal service or the weather, you know, agencies or environmental groups or, you know,
science and research and all these things generate enormous amounts of value for people in non-economic
terms, you know, in terms of our wellbeing, our, um, you know, sort of general knowledge of the world
around us or availed, you know, our ability to communicate with one other, our health, our understanding
of the sciences, whatever it may be, that is not directly profitable. And so they don't see the point.
They say, why don't we just take those things and turn them into businesses? Like, why would we have
a library when you could go to Amazon and rent a Kindle ebook that you don't even own? You just get
sort of a license to, to read it and then you give it back. Um, or you could buy a physical book from
amazon.com. You know, why, why would you even want something like that? And they just fundamentally
don't understand the purpose of it. And it's a, it's really devastating to watch because there is
so much value in social services like this that contribute to a functioning society that would be,
I think, very evident if you were able to look beyond, you know, quarter by quarter financial
results. But by stripping these away, you know, it will be, um, I think incredibly evident,
the actual costs to, you know, everyday people who, who use these services, who rely on these
services. I mean, when do you think the last time Elon Musk entered a library was, you know,
like, when do you think he, you know, even, I suspect he doesn't even fundamentally know what a library
is. You know, I think he sees it as a place where you go, you find a book that you want, you rent it,
you know, you don't pay the author. He probably thinks like, oh, the publishers are losing out on
this money. Yeah. He doesn't see that libraries offer internet access to people who need it to
apply for a job. You know, you can go and use a computer there if you don't have one of your own.
Um, it's a warm place to be, you know, if you are unhoused and you need, you know, a moment to get out
of the weather. Um, you know, community groups meet there, there are incredible services provided.
Um, librarians serve so many roles beyond just telling you what book to read. And those things,
I think are completely just not seen by people like Elon Musk. And, and, you know, I'm focusing
on libraries here, but you can extend that analogy to pretty much anything. You know, I think that
Elon Musk sees, you know, um, the, the funding of science at universities or whatever. And he just
sees it as, you know, oh, we're just letting these frivolous scientists go research transgender
mice or whatever the conspiracy theory is. And he doesn't see the incredible value of producing,
you know, scientific research for the public benefit, um, that fundamentally improves people's
lives. But, you know, there's no dollar sign there. And so why would we do that? You know,
why, why would we do something if it's not profitable to us?
There's so many things I want to say in response. Um, and I think while beginning with this sort of
paraphrasing a former podcast guest of mine, Amy Kerr, who's a community organizer in the UK,
and she came on the show and it's an extraordinary episode. And I recommend everybody go and listen to
it. But one thing she said that really stood out was how our elite are in this era in comparison to
others. And she was speaking about the industrialists in Birmingham, which is where she's from.
And she, I mean, she has no love for them, uh, is no love for the slave trade upon which they built
their fortunes and everything. But they did invest in the education of local people. They set up public
libraries. There was a speech, uh, given by an MP who was kind of connected in sort of saying,
we need a public library bill. You know, we need to raise the education levels of people because also
it's going to benefit us. It's going to benefit our industries. It's going to benefit society.
And just that today there's such a disconnect. These men do not think systemically in any way.
They don't think that they have to invest back in, in any way. They, they, it's almost like they
want an uneducated society. And they, well, this is the thing, right? Because obviously
they're using misinformation and disinformation campaigns as well. So I wonder, surely it,
there's also more apart from just, you know, they don't see the value on it. There is an
active attempt to undermine information systems and knowledge ecosystems, isn't there? Because,
I mean, you're one of sort of the, the, uh, oh, I don't want to use a kind of hierarchical value.
You're an incredibly valuable, uh, editor on Wikipedia. Uh, I think I, what I read this morning was
you, um, you did a hundred thousand edits or something in, in 2022. Um, what is it about
having free and open, accessible information, both physical spaces like libraries and online
spaces like Wikipedia that is so valuable to society?
Well, I mean, frankly, you cannot have democracy without an informed public. Um, you know, it is
such a fundamental part of how society operates. I mean, there's a reason that if you look at,
you know, the universal declaration of human rights, in addition to, you know, access to base
needs like food and shelter and, you know, protection from violence and, and things like that,
it talks about access to science and information and free information. Um, because that is a human
need. It's a human right essentially to have access to information. Um, but when you are an authoritarian
who is pushing a frankly, very regressive set of ideas, it does not benefit you to have informed
people around you. Um, if you want to make people believe that, you know, immigrants are a danger to
your society or that trans people not only don't deserve rights, they don't even exist.
Yeah.
Or if you want, uh, people to think that climate change isn't real, um, you know, many of these
different things, then it does not benefit you to have, you know, uh, good science being produced
on those topics. It does not benefit you for your, you know, the public who is voting for you to
understand that actually science says very different things than what they're trying to
make you believe. It doesn't benefit you to have a news media that is functioning adequately, that is
criticizing, skeptical of the things that you say. It doesn't benefit you to have people,
you know, um, having adequate access to history books that would show that this is not the first
time we've seen regimes do this and we can look at history to see how these things play out. Um,
and so it is very beneficial to slash these things, to remove people's access to information,
to make it harder for people to, um, not only access the sort of countervailing beliefs that,
that speak out against the narratives that the government is trying to push, but to make it very
challenging for those countervailing narratives to even exist by, you know, defunding public media
or campaigning to actually, um, harass or, you know, be essentially violent towards the journalists
and researchers and writers who speak, speak out against what you're doing. Um, and so we see campaigns
like this to, to slash, uh, funding to these types of services. And not only that, but what
remains, you know, to go back to the library example, there is a statement from the recent,
um, you know, acting head of the IMLS who the, the library, uh, the sort of federal library and museums,
uh, body, um, who is not a librarian, by the way, he's a sort of career politician who, uh, is,
is in this, is in this position. Um, a statement that libraries should serve to
spread American patriotism and, um, Oh, wow. Yeah. I mean, it's, it's an absolutely overt
propaganda directive that, you know, we should be using American libraries to, um, promote American
exceptionalism and, um, you know, sort of, uh, you know, he sort of couches it in the idea that
libraries should exist to reflect America's values, but then very much, um, redefines what those values
are. You know, people would normally say that the right to free speech is an American value or the
freedom of, you know, to access information, like actual quality, unbiased information is American
value. But it's very clear from the statement that that is not the American value that he's speaking
about. Um, and so I think, you know, it's all a part of this, this initiative to not only,
you know, turn everything into a business that turns a profit and, and reduce anything that they
see as waste because it's not doing so, but also to pursue their political goals and to entrench their
own power by removing these services that contribute to an informed, um, empowered public.
It's a very frightening, uh, state of affairs right now, because especially with the rhetoric
surrounding, um, trans people, which is almost like taking a shot at the, you know, the lowest rung
in terms of vulnerability, like who are the closest people to reach that I can pull down?
Um, they're just going to keep working their way up that rung. And when does it come that,
you know, people that are disabled are unprofitable? Um, or...
I think it already has. I mean, look at our healthcare system.
Well, yeah, absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. I completely agree. But to the extent that things will be
completely inaccessible to them or even that small thing in which, you know, maybe one part of the,
uh, you know, the, the, the, the system of financialization makes a profit, then that's
just going to be taken away and sort of diverted into something else. So when is it that, you know,
people who exist in, in, in ghettos are totally unprofitable because there's been an element of
profit with regards to let's sideline people. Let's ensure that they aren't able to enter into
certain spaces in society. Let's fuel these communities with drugs. Let's send them guns.
Let's just keep them destabilized in order to fulfill, you know, the, the massive imaginative
racial divide, essentially, for example. Um, but even that was kind of, it fulfilled this
profit in like a systemic analysis way of like, it keeps certain people on top or certain people
that look a certain way on top. Whereas what seems to be particular about how Trump and Musk
are approaching it is the lack of systemic analysis, like with regards to the library,
like it's actually beneficial to have an educated public, especially if you're in the business of
tech, quite frankly, or if you're in the business of innovation, uh, or America being the best place
ever, it would, you would probably go further faster if you educated your public and had, and made,
you know, work an inviting place for everybody to come in with all of their ideas. But they really,
uh, do seem to be atomizing every single bit of what it is to be an American or American life or American
industry and just kind of either funneling into it or, or, or, or pulling away.
A part of it does come down to the belief system at play here, which is, you know, the, the frankly
eugenic beliefs of a lot of these people that, you know, it is actually beneficial broadly to, you know,
to Bennett, to, um, raise, you know, white, uh, American born men who are straight, you know, who
are conservative, who hold quote traditional values, um, and to, you know, elevate them to
positions of dominance while reducing the positions of everyone else around them.
And, you know, even though you could take a purely economic view on that, or, you know, try to, um,
you know, sort of pull away that, but, um, the underlying belief system there and say that,
oh, well, you know, it's, it's more economically productive to have a diverse workforce or, you know,
try to make those types of arguments. It's never going to resonate with them because that does not
fit their genuine root worldview that these people are inherently superior. Um, and, you know, one thing
I've really tried to, to underscore is that as we see people, you know, the, uh, the regime in America
going after the most vulnerable, whether it's, you know, trans people, um, immigrants, you know, people
of color, uh, the homeless, and so on. Um, you know, the vast majority of Americans are much, much closer
to those groups of people than they are to the billionaires who are creating these policies.
And as the different groups of people are being attacked and, you know, they are sort of moving
their way up the ladder, um, you know, going after women, you know, and, um, people who, you know,
historically have held, you know, white women, for example, who have held a very privileged position,
frankly, compared to much of the country, you know, those white women who voted for Trump
are way, way closer to the people, you know, who have been victimized by the administration so far
and do not seem to understand that it is, they are not the in group. They are not the people who
will be elevated above the people that they view as lesser than they are, frankly, next on the list.
And, you know, I really wish that we did not have to resort to saying you could be next. You know,
I wish that people understood that even if you're not trans, going after trans people is a problem,
and it's something that we all need to speak out against. You know, people should not have to say,
well, I'm, you know, it's not going to be me, uh, before they care about something. But frankly,
it is quite, you know, important that people realize that you are going to be next, you know,
you are not the tech billionaire, you are not the group of this very small group of elite people who
is, you know, been deemed to be better than everybody else. You are the riffraff that they
think is expandable.
Yeah, totally. I completely agree with you. And I agree as well, that we've reached a very,
sort of sad place where, you know, empathy apparently doesn't quite cut it anymore.
Apparently empathy is bad, according to Elon Musk.
According to Elon Musk. And I love people that have put that quote, that Hannah Arend quote,
you know, on top of it then about how like, the first thing to go when you're heading towards
authoritarianism or fascism is empathy. But then also, it does mean that we need to kind of work on the
the ground that we are on in this sense of like, if empathy isn't working for whatever reason,
because people are frightened, because they've been suffering sort of decades of propaganda at that,
at this time, then yeah, if you are next is the message that works, then let's keep shouting it.
Let's keep shouting it. You are next. We're all next. Um, I want to ask Molly,
just because we're kind of coming up to time, I do want to ask and go back to Wikipedia.
And maybe we can kind of frame it in what we were just saying, how is it that Wikipedia has survived
the this onslaught? And how is it that Wikipedia functions given it's totally free and people
volunteer for it? And how is it? How is Wikipedia not next on the chopping block, no matter how many
times there have actually been attempts to kind of come at it and undermine it? What's it doing?
That's so brilliant and could be a model for what the web is. Well, I think that, you know,
we can't definitively say that Wikipedia is not next. And we need to very actively work to make
sure that it isn't. You know, the resilience is not an inherent feature. It's something that
we sort of have to work to maintain and continue to support. But I do think that, you know,
not to get too sort of hippy dippy about it, but, you know, humans fundamentally understand the
importance of knowledge. They are curious creatures, they want to know things. I mean,
if you're out with friends, and you're talking about something, and you know, you're like,
who was the president of Estonia, you know, you want to go Google it and look it up and see, you know,
the Wikipedia page comes up and you want to know. That is a very human, you know, impulse. And the
desire to sort of collect information and make it available to people is not something that,
you know, can be stamped out by people who just say, you know, argue that it's not profitable.
And so there is this group of a very passionate community around Wikipedia who believes so strongly
in the value of making knowledge free to everyone, freely available, free of cost. And, you know,
is so passionate about that, that they will devote their time to it without any promise of, you know,
economic, you know, support for it. And they believe that it is just a fundamental good to
have that out in the world. And so I think that is a, you know, sort of a key part of how Wikipedia
remains alive is that, you know, it is the human impulse to do something like this. And, you know,
people will devote a lot of time and energy to the things that they care about. And if that happens to
be the sharing of information, then we end up with things like Wikipedia. And, you know,
I think on the other hand, readers understand how valuable it is. They know that it is not something
that is just to be taken for granted. They know that in order for it to continue to exist,
they need to support it. And so people will donate to it. And I think these things are very powerful,
you know, the fact that not everything just because, you know, the government says that
information isn't important doesn't mean that everyone suddenly believes that. And that goes
for everything. I mean, just because the government says that trans people aren't people doesn't mean
that everyone suddenly believes that. And so by harnessing the power of the people, you know,
at the community level, who truly believe that information is important and valuable,
or the trans people have rights and need to be protected, or, you know, whatever the cause may be,
that is incredibly powerful. And we can end up with, you know, projects like Wikipedia, which is,
I think, frankly, like one of the wonders of the world at this point. And, you know, other projects
that are just community led, they do not rely on the governments or any sort of, you know, official
stamp of approval. But, you know, that does make them vulnerable in some ways to attacks from those
entities when they are seen to be contra to those goals. And so I think, you know, that explains why
we've seen these attacks on Wikipedia lately. Ewan Musk, you know, for one has, has been very aggressively
attacking Wikipedia recently, we're seeing other groups, trying to undermine, you know, the trust
in Wikipedia, or, you know, reduce the degree to which people support it financially. And so we have
to be very active and remaining resilient against those things. But I do think it serves as a model
for, you know, the fact that the human impulse is ultimately good, and, you know, working to
improve, you know, the circumstances of those around us. And, you know, by harnessing that,
it can be very, very powerful. I completely agree with you. I think it's, I think it's,
as well, an emblem, a sort of burning flame of how wonderful humanity can be. And you hear stories a
lot about projects that are completely free. And no, for anyone listening, given the article I wrote
recently, I'm not talking about Planet Critical, I'm talking about, with Lydia and The Guardian,
things that are totally free. And then people just donate and donate and donate and donate,
because they just, they, they are recognizing that generosity and want to be generous.
Right. I mean, that's how, that's how I operate with my newsletter as well, is like,
everything's open access, everything's free to read, you don't have to pay. Yeah, exactly. And like,
and people are sometimes shocked to see that that's even a possibility or something that could be
sustainable. But, you know, I think it, it just sort of goes to what I truly believe, which is that
humans want to see, you know, important work being done. And even if they are able to benefit from
that work without repaying, you know, in a financial sense, they want to make sure that these
things are sustainable, because they understand that, you know, in this world, things don't just
happen for free. And that there is a cost to maintaining Wikipedia or Planet Critical or whatever
it might be. And so they support those things. And, you know, like I said, I think that it's very
powerful. I wonder, Molly, something, a conversation I've been having recently, and increasingly amongst
sort of online people, if you will, is the crisis of the subscription age, the fact that something else
is going to have to happen and pop up, we are going to have to build our own systems that contain our
information, essentially. And how can we do it in a kind of like, like a Wikipedia way? How can we work
for free in a way that benefits the society, you know, and also that they then help us sort of continue
this? Beats on all of the research that you've done, all of the work that you've done on your own
newsletter and Wikipedia, I mean, how feasible, and everything that you just said about the human sort
of impulse to help. What does a web look like, in which we are not kind of victim to algorithms that
are dictated by their billionaire owners? And just a quick aside, I do think that these fucking idiotic
men would have been so much more helpful to their business model had they kept out of the way and stayed
in the shadows rather than their desperate desire to be like, front and centre of attention and to also
like, like Zuckerberg fucking releasing videos about like the latest updates to Meta and the fact
that they're getting rid of, you know, like fact checking for example, idiot, idiot, stay away. If you'd
stayed away for longer, people wouldn't have been as aware that they are essentially being housed in
private camps by, you know, men with too much power, who are actively making decisions to destroy our
information ecosystem. So what does the opposite of that look like? And can we have that?
Yeah, I mean, I think that's, I think it's fundamentally very challenging because, you know,
we live under capitalism, we have to, you know, pay for healthcare in the United States, for example. And,
you know, everyone sort of is forced to, you know, sort of find ways to scrape by. And so if you are,
pursuing a model like the Wikipedia model, or, you know, the models that we use, where we publish,
you know, and work for free, essentially, and then sort of hope that people will generously support our
work, that's a challenging thing to just begin to do. You know, most people can't just quit a job and
start writing with no income. Yeah. And, you know, hope against hope that people find their work and
support them, especially in a web where it's so algorithmically controlled, and where independent
writing is so, or media in general is so sort of penalized by these algorithms. That is a very risky
thing to do. You know, people who are trying to do it as a side thing when they have, you know,
nine to five jobs, or children that they're taking care of, or elderly family, because, you know, the
healthcare system in this world, in this country is so bad. You know, it is, I think it is incredibly
challenging. And it is a very uphill battle in the system that we live in. And so while I, you know,
encourage people to consider that as an avenue, I also recognize that it is just such a challenging
thing to do, because people are forced into these models that are very, you know, sort of
built around the systems that are in place, you know, people are encouraged to go start a sub stack
and paywall your articles so that people are forced to pay before they can read what you have to say. And
oh, by the way, a sub stack gets 10% of that, which goes to their venture capital backers, you know,
or whatever it may be. That's just one example. And so I think without changing the underlying system,
it is very challenging to, you know, to just say that, you know, this is how we should do things going
forward. And you shouldn't have to worry about, you know, health insurance, for example, like you're
gonna, you know, if you should just quit your job and not have any health insurance and work for free
and hope that people will pay you and, you know, God, I hope you don't fall down the stairs, you
know, or something like that. And so, you know, I think, I think it is a much larger conversation
around the systems, as well as just, you know, what people can do day to day. But, you know, I do think
that there are possibilities, even under the system that we live in, you know, to create projects that do
recognize that, you know, people are good, and they support the things that are valuable to them
and to society, broadly speaking. And so we can get a little bit creative about how we work around
the, you know, sort of billion dollar companies that are trying to take up every inch of the web
that is available to us. And, you know, maybe we can carve out our own spaces where we reject that
model and where we don't, you know, plaster everything with ads or, you know, scrape every
tiny drop of user data out of the people who visit our websites or paywall everything so that we can
then, you know, send off a portion of our income to these tech billionaires.
Right. I mean, it's just constant, isn't it? The amount of money that we are creating for them
all the time by, you know, working for free, which is essentially what scrolling on Instagram is,
Right. Or, you know, being forced, people like me that have no idea what a code even looks like,
you know, like something like Substack pops up and it's like, great, that facilitates me doing the
thing that I really love to do. But there is this sense of like, just the impending enclosure of all
of these spaces. And we've seen it with Musk and how he sort of driven Twitter deliberately into the
ground in order to kind of kill the public square, the only public square on the internet that was
leading left. And Meta is obviously planning on becoming a place that focuses on virality
rather than information, which is going to harm all of the journalists with, you know,
the erasure of their fact checking services, which weren't particularly good to begin with,
but they were something. And it is, I mean, I don't know what particular characteristics the founders
of Substack have that would impede them from being sort of swept up in this tide as well. Maybe they
haven't, maybe they don't. But either way, the feeling, well, yeah, exactly. Exactly.
The feeling is that we do need to build our own systems that are going to be able to hold
our information for when they take the chainsaw to the online web of knowledge systems as well.
Right.
Yeah. I mean, I think that's very much accurate. And I, you know, I try to be somewhat
gentle, I think, with sort of the individual responsibility here, because, you know, there is
so much I see so much in the way of sort of the argument that individuals should be purists about
their online presence and they should get rid of, you know, Facebook or Twitter or Substack or whatever
it is because, you know, they are these extractive companies and your free labor is, you know, benefiting
their bottom line and so on. But like, you know, it feels like we're sort of tilting at the wrong
problem there. We don't necessarily need to spend all of our time, you know, sort of lobbying against
the individual writer on Substack who has discovered that this is finally a place where they can
get their voice heard and maybe make a living, you know, even though it does benefit the tech
billionaires who run Substack and the venture capitalists who support them. And, you know,
maybe that energy is perhaps better focused not on the people who are often forced to use these
platforms essentially, but on those platforms themselves and on the systems that, you know, have
enabled those platforms to become so dominant and to create these walled gardens on the web.
Um, and maybe we can spend our energies, you know, trying to support alternatives,
um, you know, rather than sort of demonizing the individual. It sort of reminds me of a sort of
carbon footprint model, you know, where so much blame is placed on individuals for not, you know,
recycling their salad containers or for taking one trip a year on an airplane. When, you know, if you
actually look at the, you know, an individual person's carbon footprint, it pales in comparison to
corporations and, you know, the biggest, you know, emitters out there. And so it seems like,
you know, sort of focusing on the wrong problem.
I do agree with you. I think that, um, it doesn't really matter in the sense, like what individuals
would choose because so much kind of goes into the effort of like programming us to behave in a
certain way or closing off all other avenues so that we can only behave in a certain way.
Um, but I also, I have to say, I don't think that sort of putting pressure on the system
anymore kind of works when we've got people with such immense wealth and such immense power
who are doing illegal things in order to, to, to make it stay like, well, like what does it
matter anymore? In a sense, like the, the idea of protesting, for example, big fan of protesting,
want it to continue, but the idea of it having any kind of leverage in a world where we sort of, um,
disavow now international law or even just law itself, it means that we need to do something else
because the system is also crumbling in and of itself. That's what they're doing. They're
deliberately dismantling it. The normal avenues of pressure and, uh, boycott and these sorts of things,
they don't seem to exist in the same way, maybe boycott. And that's why I'm kind of now of the opinion
that we do need to be building the things that we need to see for ourselves because we need to have
a safety net to catch us essentially. Um, because the, the carpet is definitely going to come out
from under our feet at some point. Yeah, I think that's true. I mean, I, I do think that we need
to proactively build alternatives, but I think that frankly, building alternatives is a way to,
you know, pressure the incumbents in this way, you know, and it is a creative way to push back,
you know, that isn't, um, you know, sort of the sort of individual responsibility to the level of
things. I mean, I do think that people should make, you know, informed decisions for themselves
and especially, um, you know, if, if they are able to choose alternatives that are, you know, better
for them, I think that's very important. And I think that, you know, people should very closely
consider which services that they use and, you know, why they're using them and who benefits and
whether using them is, is ultimately beneficial or not in the grand scheme of things. But,
you know, I think that, um, changing the, the systems, making it so that we do have options that
are not one of four, you know, garbage social media platforms, for example, or, or, you know,
web publishing platforms or whatever it may be, um, is very powerful. And, you know,
I do think that there is an enormous amount of power among the everyday people, you know,
in that, um, you know, these tech billionaires would not exist without these ordinary people
that they are extracting profits from. Yeah. Molly, I could keep you all day continuing this,
but I, I know that we have to end, um, just, this has been such a wonderful discussion and
I'm so grateful to you. My final question is, who would you like to platform?
Um, I would recommend Ed Anguessa Jr. Um, he's a really incredible tech writer who has just such
a full understanding of the sort of systematic end of things and the, the sort of social, um, layer to
all of this. He's done some really incredible writing on, uh, labor and the tech worlds. And
I think he's a really important voice. Wonderful. I will reach out to him. Molly,
thank you so much for your time today. Thanks for having me.
If you want to learn more, I've put links to everything in the description box below.
Remember to subscribe to the channel if you're new here and share the episode if you enjoyed it.
To support the show, subscribe at planetcritical.com where you can read the weekly newsletter. You can also
become a Planet Critical patron. All links are in the description box below. As always,
my deepest thanks to that community. Planet Critical wouldn't exist without your support.
Thank you everyone for listening and for coming on this journey together.
