Hello, this is Benjamin Boyce, and welcome to another episode of the Boyce of Reason
podcast. Today's guest is brought to you by the fine folks at ThinkSpot, who hooked me
up with the illustrious Dr. Stephen Hicks. Dr. Stephen Hicks is a professor at Rockford
University in Illinois. He's also a lecturer, a content creator, and an author who's been
speaking about postmodernism for 20 years now. In this discussion, we use my documentary
work on the Evergreen State College as a springboard to explore how postmodernism is supposed to
be applied in the world and in inter-human interaction and within institutions of higher
learning and so on and so forth. What else can I say except for that you guys are in for
a real treat with this one. Here's Dr. Stephen Hicks. It's a total honor to get to speak with
you. I've been aware of your work for a number of years now. One of the things that I most
appreciate about your work is how accessible it is and you actually make this intellectual
milieu really actually fun to engage with by breaking it down into units that are easy to
grasp and then with that comes the ability to navigate through this landscape.
Great. Well, good. I appreciate the feedback. I spent some time looking at the documentary
you've been working on and that's also some very good work. Sad, frightening, at the same
time the application of theory. It's one thing to read these guys in the abstract and then
project what it would be like in reality and then you actually see the experiment being run.
Do you think that what happened at Evergreen is pretty much a direct application of postmodern
theory? Oh yes, absolutely. There's no unclarity about that. All of the elements are there.
You're not interested in engaging with other people as rational beings so you've given up entirely
the idea that there's argument and evidence and so forth. You don't see people as individuals. You
see them as avatars or representatives of a group. You have a totally collectivized understanding of what
it is to be a human being. You see those different collective groups as in adversarial relationships with
each other. The only way then those adversarial relationships can be resolved, if you're not going
to do it rationally and civilly, treating individuals as individuals is going to be through group power
struggles and a battle for dominance. That's very clearly what one sees at Evergreen. The young
student activists have been paying very careful attention in their classes, learning from their
professors. They're good students in that regard. And now they are, you know, universities are a training
ground for young scientists and artists and humanists of various sorts. And so here we see the training
ground for activists of a certain sort and they're flexing their muscles and seeing how much they can get
away with. Is there any other way that postmodern theory can be acted out in the real world?
Was Evergreen, did they misinterpret what they were handed? Well, I think there are a number of
substrands of postmodern theory. I mean, you know, at a high level of abstraction, one is skeptical, one is
relativized, one tends to collectivize human beings, rather than seeing them as individuals, you or one
has a rather than a harmonious rights respecting expectation of civil society, sorting its issues out
peacefully, you do have decided somehow things are a cynical jaded battleground. Now, at a high level of
abstraction, those don't necessarily predict a particular political outcome. So one can be
cynical and jaded and skeptical about all sorts of things. And one's attitude can be to give up
and to say, well, it's all pointless. There's no genuine value or truth to be sought in the world. And
it's an ugly, ugly place. So I'm just going to withdraw and engage in quietism and defeatism. I think
a lot of people who are schooled in postmodernism, they, they go in that direction. Another possibility,
of course, is to say, you know, if there are no truths, no values that are better than others,
and no cultures or civilizations that are better than others, then the implication of that should be
a kind of radical equalitarianism, where you then just say everybody's narratives are equally legitimate,
all groups are equal. And so that can foster a kind of toleration ism, where we just have a live
and let live, you do your thing, I'm going to do my thing as well. And that also can come out of strong
postmodernism. But this one is is another strain where you say if there are no true values, we just
have collectivized understandings of the way the world works. But at the same time, I feel some desire
to assert my values in the world, I'm not going to be a quietist, I'm not going to just be a live and let
live person, I want to see my my agenda realized, then one will become a kind of a power activist,
and so on. So I think there are multiple strands of postmodernism.
One thing that I was wondering your thoughts about, given your your your theoretical work on on the
the procession of postmodernism through various different enlightenment and counter enlightenment
discussions, when it gets to the era that we're in now, where we have a lot of people being trained
in these various gender studies, racial studies, all these different studies groups that seem to be
founded on conflict theory, or on reversing a hierarchy or understanding everything as a
relationship of power. So all these people are being trained in this thought process, and then they're
going out in the workforce. And it seems like the only viable work that they can do is to insert
themselves into HR departments or into activist enclaves within bigger corporate or educational
structures. So I guess your question is, is, is postmodernism adaptive to bureaucracy? Is that one of its
applications? Well, yes, you're going to have lots of people who may be in their heart of hearts,
they want to be activists and out on the street and, and so forth, and wearing the black uniform,
black on black. But at the same time, they are pragmatic enough to realize they want to make a
living right of some sort. And so if they have a university degree, there's a natural pipeline for
them to go into work, and then they will cast around, as you say, and see where their skill set best fits.
And certainly HR departments is, is one department is there, you are in a position to choose who comes
in and who doesn't shape the hiring and promotion policies. And that's a position of some power. But
it doesn't necessarily require you to have management skills or marketing skills or leadership skills. So,
yeah, that's a, that's a possible route as well. Another way is, if you are more of a subversive,
you like the idea of being a revolutionary who doesn't fight, you know, street fights in a
physicalistic form, but you like the idea of working within and subverting institutions that you think are
corrupt, then often from the SJW perspective, you know, corporations are the big bad,
Bette Noir, the great Satan of American life. So there's a charge to, in effect, being a double agent,
right? So you go in, and your goal is to subvert the institutions from the inside. So that's another
possibility. Is, is there any other way that this, once you adopt this ideology, what kind of value
can you create in society? Or is it only, from your perspective, is it only about changing other
people's values or controlling other, how other people behave? Can you create any positive value in
the world? Yeah, yeah. Well, in a high level of abstraction, I think postmodernism is ultimately
negative, it's critique all the way down, critique of knowledge, critique of any sort of metaphysics
or scientific understanding of reality, critique of the notion of, you know, that technology is
improving the world, or that markets and democracy are viable, positive projects. But I don't think
any postmodernist is ever in his or her individual life going to be completely nihilistic. Typically,
people, particularly Americans, the North Americans, and so forth, they start off as typically, you know,
decent young people, and they imbibe normal North American values. And so, by the time they go to
university, they, they genuinely are, for the most part, decent people, and they're concerned about
all of the things that decent people are concerned with, and pollution and the legacy of racism and
sexism and why we can't get along. But then, you know, all of those issues can be dealt with healthily.
But if you get a poisoned intellectual framework to understand those, then your your positive values get
turned against you. But they don't necessarily all go away. So you might start off as an ordinary,
decent person who thinks racism is still a problem to some extent. But you don't have any conceptual
tools other than the social justice warrior or the postmodern way of dealing with them. And so then you
come to have a very jaded view of it. So what you will then have is, you know, a person who is is
conflicted at some level, they really are anti racist, but they end up using very jaded and
proto racist or reverse racist tactics in trying to solve the problem. So
so I think
in some cases, it's a fig leaf, I think some cases, you know, like some of the students we see in your
documentary at at Evergreen, you know, they are just naked racists and power play people interested
in dominating and trying to humiliate and control control the institution. And I think for them,
at their level of development, the anti racism racism is a is a fig leaf, it's a it's a cover,
they can say, you know, I'm against racism. And they know that that's going to mean people will give
them the benefit of the doubt, cut them some slack, give them a moral sanction because everybody is
basically anti racist at this point. But then you can use that benevolence and that tolerance against
your your target. And I think that's a calculated strategy. But I think if you were to talk with the
average, say, freshman student at Evergreen, or some such other place, that person probably is is
more mixed, they have some genuine anti racism, anti sexism, they're still decent human beings,
but they are in the process of being transformed, you know, their, their intellectual understanding is
in conflict with their, at that point, acquired legitimate anti racism.
And how do you think, in studying this, you've been looking at this, or you've been speaking
about this for 20 years now, I think, right, was the first talk that I stumbled on. Yeah, 1998.
What are the steps that start to erode those, as you call them, the positive North American values
into that jaded? What are some of the like the psychological phase states of that?
Oh, yes, right. Well, I think, kind of first generation postmodernism, as I think of it is,
you know, if you're thinking of individuals, you know, such as Foucault, and Derrida, and Rorty,
and the others, they're all extraordinarily well educated people, because at that point,
they're in my, they are genuine intellectual minorities, they're well schooled in the majority
traditions. So they know the arguments inside and out. And they, they recognize the weaknesses in
those traditions. And they're very good at teasing out the implications of those as well. So you start
off with then people who know both sides of the debate very well, and they end up being on on the
other side of the debate. But then, as those first generation postmoderns are training the next
generation of students, particularly graduate students who are going to become professors, if your
official conclusions are, there is no truth, reason is not competent for coming to know reality,
different groups have their own value struggles, and there's no logical or rhetorical way to bridge
the gulf, then what that is going to mean in the second generation is those graduate students who are
going to become professors are going to say things like, well, it's not really worth my time to try to
understand the other side's arguments, I'm not going to be able to do that. And I'm not going to expect
them to try to understand my argument. So at that point, then you say, we're not going to do the
argument thing anymore. We're also not going to say that we should treat each other civilly. That is to
say that we should respect each other's differences of opinions, right about debate. Because civility
means that we have a shared underlying concept of how we should conduct ourselves in society. But what
I've learned from the first generation is that there is no such thing, there are no universal values. And
so I've just got my values, you just have your values. So that then means discussion is going to break
down. I think for a while, what's going to happen then is, they will say, what we should then just
do is kind of study or make equal time for all of the different perspectives in the in the in the
curriculum. So, you know, we'll have one group and we'll do our thing, maybe we are feminists of a
certain fight, or we're, we're African American theorists of a certain sort, and each group will do its own
thing, and they will just be arguing for a roughly equal place in the curriculum, right. But each
aspect of the people in the curriculum, they're just doing their own thing, and they're not trying to
communicate with each other. Then I think the third thing is the third stage. This is where we are now is
once each of those enclaves right within the academic world has its own power base, and it's then
trained another generation of students, then it becomes a power struggle within the university, you
want to have hegemony, you want to grow your department, your program. But typically, that means
squeezing out the other programs. And so you'll have kind of the nasty, zero sum power play politicking
that's that's going on. So, you know, you know, so what you see it, you evergreen in 2017, then really
is that that third generation. It's not in the first generation where you, you know, mythically
reconstructing here, you would have had early evergreen professors saying, you know, there is a
strong tradition or set of traditions that believe in truth and goodness and reality and liberty and
equality, and they have these arguments against each other. And we think that's all ultimately crap,
but we understand that tradition, and here are our arguments against that. And then you have a second
generation of evergreen professors who will say, let's stop talking to each other, let's just make
sure that all of these different groups have their own niches on campus and their own programs, right,
and so forth. And then the third generation is going to be, you know, some of those programs will
start to assert themselves and try to squeeze out the others. Well, what's the fourth generation? Is it
the dissolution of the academy as the academy? Is it like, it turns into a variety of different
academies? Can these things get along at this stage going forward?
No, no, there's not going to be a getting along, right? So, you know, smaller, more vulnerable
institutions like, like evergreen, there will be market feedback at some level, you know, so
it'll be harder for them to attract students, harder for them to attract donors, harder for them to
attract first grade faculty who want to come and teach there. And so, you know, institutions that go too
far down that road will just go into a self destroying death spiral and will go go out of
existence, you know, unless they have some huge endowment that they can coast on for for a long
time, and then the action will just gravitate to, to some other some other place. But no, I think the
the next step is going to be that other groups will then start to backlash and use the same tactics
against the current generation of social justice warriors. So, you know, if you then start to see,
so certain sorts of feminism, for example, start to manifest themselves in very ugly, adversarial
power play forms, then there's going to be a subsection of males who will then say, okay, well,
we'll just do the exact same thing back. And so it'll just be outright warfare. Or if, you know,
a certain, you know, members of racial groups, you know, they want to up the things and turn it into
racial war, then kind of the nice tolerant members on the other side, and the other racial groups will
say enough is enough. And they'll just organize themselves racially, and we'll be back to old
fashioned race wars again. So you'll end up with a balkanization, if I can use that metaphor, right,
or just tribalism is a little more generalized. And it'll just be, it'll just be just fought out.
At that point, you can't predict, you know, if it's a race war, but which race is going to win,
if it's a sex and gender war, right, or if it's an ethnic war, well, I don't know, we've been having
ethnic wars for, for, for generations, and we know how that history goes, it's not predictable.
Well, what do you think about an educational institution such as Yale, where they had a
dust up, and with Christakis, and I think it was 2015, or 2016.
Yeah, it was a couple years earlier.
Yeah. And they seem to be big enough to, I guess, incorporate that way of thinking, or ameliorate
that crowd and still carry on. But it seems like the problem I have with social justice is that it
likes to capture everything, it'll capture all the medical schools, it'll capture all the sciences,
and insert its ideology, or cause the people who are trying to learn how to be a doctor to spend a
lot of time on this other secondary material that they believe is primary. Is there any way to stop it
or counter it? Yeah, no, I think that's, that's perceptive in two ways, the points you're making. One
is, you know, for all of postmodernism's rhetoric about being anti-universalistic, and anti-dominance,
and anti-imperialistic, colonial, in practice, they are extraordinarily imperialistic and universalistic.
It's, it's a total power agenda that they're, that they're going for. And you're right, Yale is
different than a case like Evergreen. Yale has huge institutional resources and reserves,
so it could, in principle, you know, there's, as Adam Smith said about economies, there's a,
there's a great deal of ruination possible in a, in a country, it does have deep reserves,
so it can tolerate a certain number of self-destructive experiments, and so on. And to some extent,
we do expect universities to be hothouses and laboratories for all kinds of wacky experiments,
and so a place like Yale, you know, might even want to encourage, but then the question is going to be,
what will Yale, and the rest of us who are watching Yale, going to learn right from the lesson? And I
think one of the things that will happen at an institution like Yale is that this will be,
I don't know, not a tempest in a teacup. I don't know how much to belittle it. But Yale has an
extraordinary number of first-rate intellectuals who are doing really good work in all sorts of
disciplines. And one of the reasons why the crazies and the activists and the people who are not
really there for education, knowledge, truth, goodness, and so forth, can get some traction at
Yale is that the first-rate people are focusing on their work, they're trying to get stuff actually
done. They're not taking the postmoderns and the social justice warriors that seriously. But then, to the
extent that the social warriors, I really don't like calling them social justice warriors because
they're really anti-social and they're anti-justice. They are warriors in a way.
Yeah, they are warriors.
Yes. We actually are the justice warriors. We have to recapture that label.
Because we actually care about truth and facts and treating individual cases. But the point is,
at a certain point, the first-rate people at Yale and the other institutions say,
all right, this is enough of a problem. This is crap. This is interfering with my ability to do my
work, my ability to train students, and so forth. And so they will redirect some of their efforts.
And as soon as you have the first-rate minds taking on what really are third-rate activist minds,
it's kind of clear to me who will win at Yale.
Yale wants to be a world-class institution.
And I can't see the current generation of professors, the administration, even the students
who are there who genuinely want to do something with their lives, the donors and so forth,
putting up with it for too long. Now, maybe that's too optimistic, but that's my sense.
Do you think that the pursuit or the possession of excellence, whether of ability or of character,
is one aspect that causes somebody to be immune to the siren call of what we're calling social justice?
Yeah, that's interesting. One of the interesting questions in philosophy is whether
one thinks about the issues rationally and considers arguments and evidence and counter-arguments,
and then makes up one's mind. And then depending on where one's reason leads, one's psychology or
emotions and your habits of thought and speech and action follow right from that. Or whether it's the
other way around, that we start off with a psychology that is somewhat perhaps implicit and then we're
attracted to philosophical positions about values and knowledge and truth that support our psychology.
So psychology is the driver and philosophy ends up being kind of an autobiography of one's psychology.
And that's an ongoing back and forth debate in the history of philosophy. Now, my view is that
both paths are possible. I mean, I think in many cases, it's clear that people come in with a psychology
and that lends them to pay attention only to things that push the buttons that they already like to have
pushed and things that take them outside of their comfort zone. They have blocks in places and they
keep their blocks up so they don't have to consider those things. So I think there are a lot of people
who do come in who are already disturbed psychologically. Maybe they have a grievance against
society, against reality. They already don't have much self-esteem and they kind of have a sneaking
suspicion that they're not going to make much of their own lives, but they still need to assert
themselves in some way. So there's some dark psychological territory coming along. And that
person, I think, is a prime candidate for certain kinds of ideology. Postmodernism is not the only one,
but there is that road and that's a natural recruiting route. But I do think it can go the
other way, that you can start with people who are basically decent, who are open to the evidence,
open to argument, who have a more benevolent understanding of themselves and humans.
But they take seriously the arguments and they buy into skeptical, jaded, cynical understandings of the
world. They really think that those are true. And over time that shapes their thinking, that shapes
their emotion, and then they can become poisoned individuals. So it can go both ways.
Were you at some point in your own development and maybe college or undergrad, did you play around
with that skeptical, jaded sense or was it always distasteful for you? Or how did you decide on which
path you wanted to go? Right. No, I remember, I think in some ways I was, you're asking me to reconstruct
the teenage Stephen Hicks. Where was I on all of these issues? I think I was mixed, but basically,
you know, intelligent, open minded, positive values are possible person. At the same time, I wasn't,
you know, an idiot and a Pollyannist. I was, you know, well aware of all of the hypocrisies and power
plays. And, you know, I went through high school, just like everybody else. So I, you get a good education
and the social types that are possible. And even though I didn't typically read what my teachers
assigned in high school, I was always reading history and literature and politics and so on.
So I was aware of the dark side and the brutality and all of the possibilities for a cynical and jaded
right view of life. And I think that was where I was when I started university. And I got a very good
liberal arts education at the University of Guelph. Partly because they had genuine diversity of
thought in a lot of the departments I studied in political science, in history, and especially in
philosophy. One anecdote I like to tell was that my philosophy department at University of Guelph
expanded dramatically in the 1960s and 70s during the baby boomer generation. And the chairman of the
department at that time was a guy named John Bruce, who was a skeptic. And he basically was given a charge
by the president of the university to go out and hire something like 12 or 14 philosophers to build up
the department. But because he was a skeptic, his attitude was, you know, I said, well, I don't really
have a an axe to grind here. And so he went to the Canadian Philosophical Association and the American
Philosophical Association meetings with a shopping list. And he said, Okay, I need a, I need a Nietzschean,
I need a Popperian, I need a Marxist, I need a Kantian, I need a Thomist. And so he basically hired
people from all over the intellectual spectrum. So this is coming back to answering your question.
So that meant that by the time I got there, basically, there were 20 philosophy professors,
and they all disagreed with each other, fundamentally, because they were all coming from
dramatically different parts of the spectrum. And I took courses with all of them. And what that then
meant was, you know, that those professors who were very strong skeptics, very strong relativists,
very strong adversarialists, Marxists, and so on, and proto postmodernists, at this point,
you know, I engaged with them at a first rate level. And it did have an effect on me. So I remember
having, you know, weeks where I would be following a line of argument, and it seemed like it was leading
to a very dark place. And if I was going to be intellectually honest, I had to go there.
And in some cases, it was leading to very jaded places. And this means that I was going to have
to look at perhaps my current friends quite differently, my parents, and so forth. So
there was an engagement there. And the way I remember deciding when I became a philosophy major was to
say, look, facts are facts. And the only way to sort this out is going to be by following the best
arguments, and weighing them, and I will just go wherever those go. So that's the path I pursued.
Even if it landed you in hell, you're fine. Yes. Yeah, that's right. That's right. So in that sense,
there was a methodological primacy, we have to follow the facts have to be true to reality. However,
ugly reality turns out to be if that turns out to be the true picture that I have to deal with human
beings as they are, even if my best understanding of human beings ends up being negative. So the
willingness to go there was there. Now, I ended up not coming to think that those are the true or best
understandings of reality, knowledge, and the human condition. But I think if you're going to really be
a philosopher or any sort of intellectual, genuinely, you do have to be open to that.
What landed you with a smile then, rather than a friend at the end?
Yeah, yeah. Well, I think it would just be a matter of, you know, reading the people who are advocates
of science, realism and perception that concept formation is a legitimate process that logic actually
works, putting those arguments up against the best skeptical arguments and the positive accounts,
right, prevailed. So it'll be the same thing on issues of human nature, value, politics, and so on.
Do there's two directions I want to go, but I'm wondering if with the armed with the tools of logic
and science, that gives you some measure of power in the world, or some measure of legitimacy and
actually being able to construct rather than the opposite, which would be only being able to criticize
indefinitely? Yeah, I would say as human beings, that is, yeah, that is the most important power that we
have, is the power of our minds to figure out the way the world works and to use that to guide our,
our actions where we are compared to other animal species wimps physically. We have a big brain and
learning how to use that very well. That's, that's where it's at for humans. So the postmoderns, you
know, if we take them as an instructive example at the other end, yeah, it does become bestiality,
you know, if you sabotage, which is what postmodernism is, you sabotage your, your most powerful tool.
It's ultimately, you know, to give an analogy, you know, to, uh, you know, a young bird that learns
to pluck out its own feathers. It's, it's a love destruction. You, you described a moment in your
intellectual life that I think might map onto a moment in the intellectual life of our culture where
there was an ability for a variety of viewpoints to hold, be held in tension. And it seems like over
time within certain pockets of academia, uh, certain groups have won out. I wonder what was the, what
allowed all those different viewpoints to be held in tension? What was the, the floor upon which all those
different thinkers could, could meet or rest? Yeah. Well, I think the, uh, the, the floor has
kind of two, I don't know how far to extend this metaphor, two pillars or two sub basements
that support the floor. So, you know, if the floor is the ideal of a liberal arts college or a liberal
arts university, where we're going to bring in genuine diversity of thought, and we're going to
meet and consider each other's viewpoints and let the best arguments and interpretations prevail.
And that we're going to be self-correcting and any conclusions that we reach, we're going to, uh,
be open to reevaluating though. If that's the floor, then the, uh, the, the pillars are going
to be one that there, there are such things as facts, uh, that reality matters and that we are striving
to come to understand reality. And the other is that we are capable of doing so if we go through a
certain process and we can go through that process individually of being open to all of the, uh, the
data, uh, and initially having an open mind, uh, orientation to doing our best to try various ways
of categorizing that data to running experiments, to analyzing the results, to putting our interpretation
of the results out there and letting other smart people critique them and then taking seriously their
critiques and responding to those. And then to formalize that in a social setting, which is what
a university is supposed to be, where we're going to train young students, how to do that, whether
it's a literature class and we're interpreting Beowulf or if it's a biology class or, or a politics class.
So the platform then is, uh, we're trying to get to reality. There is a reality out there.
And if we follow this methodology individually and socially, we, we can do it. And what happened then
is, uh, the skeptics in the subsectors of the academy that you're talking about, they won out,
they became anti-realist, you know, they came to be believed that, well, Hey, you know, religious
people and scientific people and everyone in the middle, we've been arguing for thousands of years
and nobody can convince anybody else. So let's not talk about reality anymore. People are just going
to believe what they're going to believe anyway. And then on top of that, they have, uh, a couple of
centuries of very skeptical arguments that have been directed against all of the elements that
I just went through, that we can be open to facts, that we can interpret things that we can, uh, run
experiments and the experiments can give us decisive results one way or the other. All of that got
hollowed out. So both the, uh, the fact orientation and the, the pro empiricism and reason orientation got
hollowed out. And is there a, yeah, is there, is there a moment where they realize that they're
undermining the ability of a utopia whatsoever? Because if, if they don't have a floor to replace
the floor that they're eroding, like, I just don't see why you would do that. If, if you don't have
another floor, it seems like they have like another better world, uh, constructed of equity or fairness,
but it seems like it's missing that, that feedback loop.
Right. Well, that's, that's an interesting question about postmoderns. And I think, again,
there are subgroups within postmoderns. I mean, some will say, you know, I'm taking the negative
conclusion seriously. And what that means is that all values ultimately are failures and I don't have
anything to do to replace it with. Now I might have my personal commitments that I've inherited or
not have lived with, but when I apply my own postmodern critical tools to my own values,
I have to realize that my values don't escape that either. So all I'm left with is subjective
preferences and I can't, I can publicly assert those, but I can't publicly argue that they are in fact
better than anyone else's. Um, and so I think, uh, Derrida, for example, in the sixties and, uh, seventies
was in, in this position. Uh, and I think, uh, Foucault to a large extent was in that position off
and on. Uh, and I think someone like Rourke and, um, um, uh, Derrida later in his life, they, uh,
are still kind of holding out hope for some way of having their value framework escape the corrosive
effects of a thoroughgoing skepticism. So there's a late interview, for example, with Jacques Derrida,
before he died, I don't know the exact year, but, uh, he's being asked, uh, about, you know,
what he actually believes positively in effect is a variation on the question that you just asked.
And, uh, you know, basically what he says is where, you know, forthrightly, you know, postmodernism
and deconstruction, it, uh, it leads to the creation of monsters. It's just, everything ends up being
empty and, and ugliness. Everything is, uh, is ultimately shit and there is no positive value,
but at the same time, and then he goes in a somewhat platonic, Kantian way, but wistfully,
where he wants to say, I would still like to believe in some sense that, uh, this equalitarian world
vision, uh, can serve as, uh, as a regulative standard that in some sense, it can escape the
deconstruction. At the end of his life, Derrida was, uh, interviewed, uh, about exactly this issue
and whether there was any positiveness that can come out. And he basically said, said no,
but at the same time, he said wistfully that he kind of hoped that some sort of egalitarian idealism,
because he was a quasi-Marxist all of his career, far left, right, and so forth, might serve in some
kind of platonic or Kantian regulative idea way as a, and it's almost like as, as another worldly idea
that I can't account for where it comes from. And I really hope that it's true, but I just don't have
the intellectual resources to, uh, to support a belief in, in something like that. So he ends up
in a more conflicted place. Rorty, I think is, uh, is, uh, is a milder case, uh, you know, very well
read in the history of analytic philosophy and, and on the continentals. And he ends up going very far
down the postmodern road in terms of his understanding of the human condition and his
anti-realism and his skepticism, uh, about the powers of, uh, empiricism and, and, uh, and rationalism.
But at the same time, he never, uh, you know, gave up his kind of far left social Democrat
convictions that in his heart of hearts, this is a true and positive vision. What he seems to settle
on is that the way we formulate our values is not a rational process, but he still wants to hold that
there is such a thing as a, as a, a right set of values that can and should be urged. And so he
wants to recast his rhetorical project. That he's not going to use it in terms of truth argument and
convince people rationally, but rather we are more emotionalist and socially conditioned beings. And
that he can just find a good way to use the rhetorical tools available to him. He can recondition
a certain number of people to have the felt sympathy toward the values that he thinks are,
thinks are the right kind of, kind of values. So he wants to return to pre-modern, uh, religious,
some sort of reformulated religion then with a faith-based transcendent. I wouldn't say that Rorty
is at all religious or, or faith-based in a, in a, in a traditional sense. I would say he is
emotion-based, right? So that we, you know, it's not that we get these values from God or another
dimension or a source. Uh, I think, you know, Derrida is to some extent holding out hope that maybe
we're tapping into some sort of regulatory, or regulatory idea source, right? Or there's that quip
from Heidegger, uh, when he's being under, uh, um, interviewed toward the end of his life. And he
says, basically everything has gone to crap and all of his youthful ideals have been shown to, uh, have
been betrayed and so forth. And he says, only a God can save us. And that, that is to say, it's not
necessarily that he's believing in a God, but that, uh, uh, he kind of is hoping that in some sense,
there's a God-like creature that can maybe come down and sort out the mess that we have made for
ourselves. Now, I don't think Rorty is in that category at all. I think he's a secular thinker,
but I think he thinks that we are primarily, uh, conditioned through a linguistic, uh, a linguistic
methodology that works more on our emotions and our passions. And then what we call reasoning is an
after the fact rationalization. So what we need to do is refashion our activism and our use of language
in a more, uh, conditioning, uh, way of doing things, right? Rather than a logical scientific
way of doing things. And then he's basically a nice guy. So he, uh, in kind of the left liberal
tolerationist camp. And so he is on the other side of the, those who come out of the Marxist
revolutionary camp where, you know, really we're fine with taking it to the street and, uh,
punching people and, and, uh, killing the class enemies ultimately to refashion society.
So he's more of a democratic socialist in that sense. I just, I still don't see how they aren't
just trying to return to a religion or a religious way of looking at the world. I mean,
is there like a third option that they're trying to fashion one that's not reason one that's not, uh,
spiritual or God-based or faith-based there's this soupy kind of Darwinian emotional neuronic
neural network they're trying to form? Yeah. Well, I, no, I, I take your point.
When you look at social justice warriors, right in practice, there, there are some very striking
similarities to a religious mindset. So when we say it's a new religion, we're capturing something
right important there. So, uh, but I would say that postmodernism is a third option from a traditional
kind of religion because a traditional religion is going to say metaphysically, you know, there,
there really is a reality. You know, when we say that God exists, that's not just a social construct.
That's not just a, a subjective feel good assertion that I am making out there in reality,
in another dimension, there is a being who is a God who created the world, right? And so forth. And so
that is taken in a literalist sense. Uh, and then the, the, you know, the more moderns or the more
secular thinkers want to say, no, reality is the physical world. Maybe we can make an argument for
a God or not, but probably not. Uh, and so we're, we think reality is physicalistic material, right? Or,
or whatever, but what the postmoderns are doing is taking seriously the anti-realism that they do.
When you push them, say it is meaningless to talk about the nature of reality, whether you say it's
a religious reality or a physical reality, we just have to get rid of the reality talk. And so anytime
that we use the word reality, we put it in the scare tape square quotes, or anytime we say there's a fact
that we put it in a scare quote. So what we call reality is not out there objectively a God or out
there objectively a physical world, but rather it is a subjective creation, right? It comes from within.
We construct our own psychological reality. And, or if we are ourselves constructed as individuals to be
avatars for various or vehicles through which social forces operate, then what we take to be
reality is a social construction. And I am a vehicle for that social construction. So they are
not realist in that, in that sense at all. And also, uh, I think on the epistemological side, um,
one way of talking about religion is to say, there are people who say things like,
I know what I want to believe, and I'm going to close my mind to the arguments and the facts,
and I know that there are, uh, good arguments against whatever my religious beliefs are,
but I don't want to believe those things. And so as a matter of willing myself, I'm going to
not consider those things and double down and redouble my commitment to believing certain things.
So that's sort of a, uh, uh, uh, uh, emotion, subjective based believing, uh, that's one
prominent account of what faith is. And so we can say, well, if we look at the social justice warriors,
uh, and we're trying to reason with them and say, you know, maybe there's another way to reconstruct
these facts or, or, or you didn't attend to this and you get the sense that they have their minds
made up and they're not open to alternate interpretations, or as we see in the videos
that you've, you've done, they say, you know, we're not here to debate, right? Uh, uh, you know,
we're not interested in, in that. And I have, and you know, what's going on inside them is they have
this very strong soup of emotions that are pointing them in a certain direction. And what animates them
is unleashing those emotions and feeling committed to acting out on the basis of those emotions.
And so the psychology is, uh, is very much the same, but it's not religious. I think in any traditional
sense, because it's not that I'm making a faith commitment to some sort of being that I take to
be an objective reality out there, however much subjectively and emotionalistically it's, it's a,
it's a subjective emotionalist commitment to a purely secular social value agenda.
But there's positive feedback, both within the religious believer, when they face the discrepancy
between reality and their belief and the social justice believer, when they face the reality
between facts and, or the, the, the data and their theory. And that's a, being in a community of
believers, a community of like-minded individuals. That's what props them up. That, it seems like
there was a hint of that in Rorty where he was going to, he just needs to create enough people around
him, uh, this liberal, you know, secular blob together that, that the reality itself comes,
we can disregard reality because we have each other. Maybe that's what causes the, it to.
Oh yeah. Yeah. That's very perceptive. And that's, no, that's it. That's exactly right.
So there's a concept that comes out of, uh, the objectivist literature of, uh, social metaphysics.
That is to say that your, your metaphysics is, uh, uh, constituted by your social circle and you, uh,
either let others in your social circle construct what you take to be real, uh, and suppress your
independent judgment about what reality might be like in order to fit into the group. And you have,
you have exactly that sense that if enough people believe it, then we can make it real.
Because most of them want to say, you know, they recognize the psychotic break, uh, that goes on
in some individuals. You know, if I say, I know there's all those facts out there, but if I just
believe, if I just really believe on something, then I can make it real, all that strong, wishful
thinking. So if you put it in individualistic terms, that seems totally nuts. And they recognize that, but
if enough people believe it, then there's a, a mass psychology. And if I have trained myself out of
exercising independent judgment, then I can genuinely come to believe whatever it is that my,
my social group is. Now there are deep epistemological roots in this, and this is why I think a lot of the
philosophy of language that the postmoderns are very well versed in. You know, so if you take
seriously and fundamentally the idea that language is a social product, and I think fundamentally
that's a false understanding of reality or of language. Language has a lot of social elements,
but it's not fundamentally a social product. It's an individual's mind in connection with reality.
And other people might teach you words and give you theories and, and, and so forth,
but ultimately what they're trying to do is guide your mind to grasp the facts as they, as they are.
But the, the, the, the philosophies of language, um, that Rorty and Derrida, and to a lesser extent,
Foucault and, and, and, and Lyotard are dealing with, they do take deeply the notion that language
is a social product and that the individual was born into a social group and you learn a language.
And so that is your basic cognitive framework. It's a socially inculcated, uh, uh, language,
but that, that language comes freighted with a certain grammar and a certain semantics and a
certain set of interpretive theories about the way the world works. And so you are conditioned
to think a certain way. And then that, what the implication of that then is, is that people who
are in different linguistic communities are then being conditioned into very different ways of
understanding the world. And so then you're off to the races and running again, and there's no way
for us to then bridge the, uh, the linguistic gaps. And then if you combine that with a, a skepticism
coming out of epistemology that says, you know, all of the, the elements of language,
all of the words that we use, all of those concepts, if you come to believe that there's no way to base
them empirically in perceptual evidence or in any sort of, uh, uh, sensory data, there's a gap between
sensation and perception, perception and conception and so forth, then reality drops out of the picture.
So then you don't have individuals coming to grasp reality by their senses and then forming abstractions.
What you have is members or unformed members of a group that are born into a linguistic community,
and they are shaped and formed by that linguistic community. So yeah, another route.
A little bit, you, you brought up the scare quotes that they put around truth and reality, and you say
it's meaningless to talk about reality. And I'm wondering what is never scare quoted then? Once
you go down that path, there's got to be something to stand on, something that you can't say that's true,
even if it is that scare quote as, as an act of, uh, mastering something else or being a part of it,
like I, I'm gain reality by distancing myself from. Yeah. And again, I think there are variations
within postmodernism on how to address that question. So if we take postmodernism and we, and
we purify it and we push all of those themes to the end, then it does seem like you end up where you
can't say anything without contradicting yourself, without engaging in a kind of performative
contradiction. So, you know, even if I put things in scare quotes, I, uh, then I'm presupposing that
the scare quote means something that that symbol has a cognitive referent and that you, uh, even though
you're a different individual can understand what I mean by that. And so we have a shared reality that
we are, we are dealing with. So at a very minimum level, if I'm going to speak even to the act of,
you know, doing ironic statements and so on, I'm not able to state without contradiction that
all language is subjective and opaque across, uh, linguistic communities, right. And so forth.
So it's the, uh, to generalize, it's this, the standard paradox of relativism that I can't say
that, you know, all truths are relative or all claims to knowledge are relative, because then
I'm including that as a knowledge claim, but I'm trying to exempt it from the relativization.
So all knowledge claims are relative is an attempt at a universal claim, not to make a relative claim,
or everything is subjective. Uh, if I want to say that to you, uh, well, I'm trying to communicate
an objective truth to you that it really is the case factually that truths are objective,
in which case I can't say that all truths are subjective or, um, you know, there is no certainty.
Well, that is a very strong claim that I'm trying to make certain. So, you know, the usual thing then
just is to throw the claim back. Well, are you certain of that? And you have to say, well, it's
probable that all claims are certain or, well, are you sure of that? And then you just end up
dabbling, right? Ultimately. So, uh, you know, in philosophy, we call this the, uh, the cratulus
option for the, the ancient Greek skeptic named cratulus who realized the end road that all of
these skeptical arguments were reaching. You can't in fact say anything. And so true to his beliefs,
he just shut up and stop saying it. I'm sure some people were happy with that.
Yeah. We wish, right. In some cases, totally. Yeah. Please take the cratulus option.
Um, yeah. So, uh, if I think if you were then going to go ahead,
you know, it just, what is the, what's the net? What's the safety net then to keep them from going
that far? Cause they don't want to shut up. Yes. Well, then I don't know. Then I think we have
to say that it comes down to a matter of a personal psychology. If you, uh, if you,
if you want to keep talking, then, uh, you know, it does seem like you're committed to thinking that
there are some values that are to be gained from continuing talking. And, uh, it does seem like
you're still saying, well, there are other people out there and I believe that they are real beings.
And I believe that language is a real phenomenon. And I believe that language communicates something.
And so I'm going to continue to try to use language to, uh, to communicate with other people.
Uh, now, of course they might then back up and say, well, uh, you know, this is just a, you know,
a personal happens to press my subjective value judgments. You know, some people might, you know,
go into a studio and put paint on a canvas. I'm just going into my, my office and putting words on
a page. It just makes me feel good. And at least intellectually, that's the best I can say about my,
about my project. James Lindsay postulates that with intersectionality, they made the one sacred
ground or the one real Island to stand on oppression. And that's the one thing that you can't question,
or that's the fundamental value. And that's how they, they, uh, resurrected the project of postmodernism
and kept it from. Yeah. Well, there is that one. Uh, I think there's, I think there's two,
again, again, there, we have a fork in the ropes and the other one would be power.
There are some postmoderns who will argue, this is not necessarily a value judgment. They'll say,
if we understand the way the world works, then kind of the ultimate substratum of reality just is power,
power manifesting itself in, in various forms. And this is then to take the Nietzschean route seriously.
So there are no, there are no entities. There are, there are even ultimately aren't individuals
that we are all just vehicles through which power, the will to power is flowing and manifesting.
Um, now, if you go that route, then you're still doing a certain amount of metaphysics. And I think
Foucault right on this score, you know, sometimes he's, uh, saying that he really is just carrying on the
Nietzschean tradition. And so he's not a full out anti-realist, but rather we will just reduce
all of what we think are other realities, material objects, gods, human beings, and so forth to
manifestations of, of power. Now then to get to the, uh, the others, right? Those who want to say
that we do have another bottom line. And the problem is that, yes, everything is power, but power
manifests itself unequally because some of these manifestations or some of these local vehicles
have a lot more power than others. And then power being what power is, the stronger power centers
oppress and exploit the weaker power centers. Uh, and that's our description of the way the world
works. Now, if you're a full on Nietzschean, then you will say, okay, so no problem. That's just the
way the world works. And you might as well just embrace the way the world works, right? Power is
a hegemonic dominating process. And, uh, so in some sense, if you have sympathies, your sympathies are
going to be with the more powerful manifestations and might makes right. And it just ends up, uh, that
way. So the analogy I sometimes use is, you know, if we step outside of a human framework and we look at
say a predatory species, you know, we look at the, you know, the Serengeti and you've got lions and
jackals and zebras and antelope and so forth, and they are engaged in a power struggle for survival.
And each of those different animals is a different center of power constituted differently. And they
are in adversarial relations to each other. And, you know, one thing you can do is say, well, so
the lionesses chased the antelope and they caught the antelope and now they are ripping the antelope apart.
So what, how do you evaluate that? Is that a good thing or a bad thing? And you say, well,
there's not a good thing or a bad thing. It's just the way the world works, right? It's just,
you know, the, today the lions were more powerful than the antelope. And you would say the same thing,
you know, the next day the lions are chasing the antelope and the antelope is faster and the antelope
gets away. Is that a good thing or a bad thing? You say, well, the same thing. It's just, in that case,
speed, that power, one, and the world just goes on. So we don't apply a normative value. It's not
that we're supposed to be in favor of one side, right? Or, or the other. Just power just continues.
Now, you can also though say, you know, when I look at, you know, animals like, I don't know,
wildebeests and zebras, you know, they're kind of fine and so forth, but I really prefer lions.
There's something majestic about lions and the king of the jungle and they're more powerful. So
really I'm going to pull for the lions. And so I, cause I, you know, there's something more noble,
right? About being a predator rather than there is about being a prey. And I think Nietzsche, if you
push Nietzsche, then he's going to be more on that side of the equation. Now to get to the, then the James
Lindsay, uh, equalitarian people, I think what you would then say is you have this understanding
that the universe is ruled by power and there are unequal centers of power and it's all adversarial
and struggle. And somehow you find that your sympathies are with those who are on the losing
ends of the struggle. So when the lion catches the zebra, you feel for the zebra and the lion is
kind of the big, bad predator. Uh, and so then when we make the transference to humans, we then say,
okay, some humans are stronger than others and humans are beating up on each others. And the whole
history of the world is the history of exploitation and oppression. And we feel for those who have been
on the losing end of the oppression. Now where that comes from, that's a, that's another story, but then
that will then be, if you take that as your universal value, that a good person feels for the exploited,
feels for the oppressed, feels for the meek, then you do have a value framework. And that will then say,
you can enter the power struggle on behalf of those who have been on the losing end of things. And that's
okay. You can use all of the power tools against the exploiter, against the oppressors, because
you're on the side of the sheep or you're on the side of the zebras and so on. I think there's three
versions of postmodernism. One is to say, there are no values. Everything just is power, right? Or
everything is, uh, uh, uh, uh, there are no pod values and there is no reality, even power, right? We
just have different narratives and some of them power is the narrative and some isn't. And then a third
option is to say power is the substrate, but we're on the side of the victims of power.
Do you think that that same sort of logic or moral valuation is what prompts people to choose reason?
Because they, they see that reason is ultimately, or logic and reason and enlightenment values,
those are ultimately the most powerful tool that we have. And so I'm going to put my eggs in that
basket rather than the postmodern basket, even if, even if they're equally wrong.
Uh, no, right. That's, uh, that is the camp then that I would be in. So then I would say,
uh, well, but I'm putting it in a, uh, you know, in a realist framework that is to say,
when we study the human condition, we studied the world, if humans are going to survive and
flourish right in the world, as it actually is, they have to use the tools that are available to
them. And reason is one of those tools. And it is the most important tool that human beings have.
And if, uh, we can then show that it is efficacious, then that is the one that we should commit to
using. So that's the, the old Francis Bacon line about knowledge is power. So the capacities that enable
us to get knowledge, we don't pursue knowledge just as an end in its own sake, or because it's
kind of fun or whatever, even though it is fun. Ultimately we want knowledge because knowledge
translates into practice and practice makes us better at living our lives.
Is there something else that a society needs other than just reason then? Is there like
subsidiary, uh, aspects to a culture that need to be in place in order for reason to
maintain its efficacy? I'm, I'm just, and I'm getting back, it's a loaded question,
because I'm getting back wondering if the reason that postmodernism came back
is because there was no religious structure undergirding or, or in conjunction with a reason
structure. So it has to revert back into a number of people can't reason their way through things.
They need to feel their way through things. And without that religious substrate, there's no
place for those people to, to find a home and connect with the reasonable people.
Well, maybe I'll ask you to say a little bit more about what you mean by a religious
substrate. Do you mean a shared set of beliefs or a shared set of habits or shared moral framework?
Is that what you mean by a religious one? Yeah, fundamentally it would be a narrative structure
that ties a group of people together, like just a story of who we are. And that story would have
pictures and songs and all the things that plug into that story that fill it out and give room for
all these different characters to exist together in a cohesive whole. I just don't know if reason alone
can sustain a society in all its different aspects. Okay. So if I'm understanding your, your,
your second elaboration already on that point, the key concepts in there were stories and narratives.
And there the contrast is to say that reason is very abstract and stories and narratives are
concretizations. So we don't talk about human nature. We talk about Shakespeare and we talk about
Chaucer and we talk about Canterbury tales and so forth.
And in that we're bringing reason down to earth in a way that's understandable to more people.
Is that where we're going? So it's not just an abstracted theoretical understanding of the world,
right? And so on. Oh, no, I, no, I think that's right. Um, yeah, I would say as human beings,
uh, at least my understanding of reason, what I mean by reason is not, uh, uh, something that is only
a set of highly abstract propositions at a very theoretical level. My view of reason is that
reason operates at all levels of abstraction, including its connections to one's perceptual
understanding of the world. So I have an empirical understanding of reason, not a purely abstracted or
what's sometimes called a more rationalistic or a purified reason understanding of the world.
Um, so yes, and I, and I do think that, uh, stories and narratives, uh, are absolutely crucial for
even the most, you know, intelligent abstractly powerful individuals, because we all, and this
is part of the knowledge is power thesis. I think that comes out of bacon. We all do need to understand
the world in principle, in terms of generalities, in terms of, uh, abstract, uh, uh, causal systems
that are operating out there, but we also need to be able to translate that to the practical day-to-day
events in our lives. And that's a, that's a huge project. Um, so, you know, if you, if we take one
virtue, for example, I mean, we can say courage is important and you and I can abstractly define
courage and distinguish it from brashness and timidity and so on. And we can have, you know,
beautifully worked out abstract taxonomies of the virtue and the corresponding vices.
But, uh, uh, in order to really understand courage, we do need to see examples of it.
Those need to be concretized. So it's gotta be, you know, do you remember, you know, Benjamin or Steven
when you were in second grade and that kid came up to you and tried to steal your lunch money,
right? That particular example, and, or to, uh, have the bedtime stories where, you know, your,
your mom or your dad is reading you a story about made up characters who were doing courageous things
and contrasting. So, uh, those are the concrete examples. Then we have the artistic narrative
representations, but we also need to go up and be able to define and conceptualize it and put it in
the context of an overall moral theory. So yeah, my understanding of reason that is robust and it
operates all up and down those levels of abstraction. So, uh, to come back then to your question and, uh,
I don't want to put words in your mouth, but it started to sound like maybe there was a kind of
an intellectual history question there that maybe space for postmodernism and its skepticism, uh, came
out of the modern project of reason being too abstracted or too purified and that it gutted or
dispensed with some shared cultural understandings that had been built up in the West over the course of
centuries. Some of them religious, some of them not necessarily religious. Um, and so
we, we, we tried to get too scientific and too rational. I'm just reconstructing a possible question
too scientific and too rational too quickly. And we threw out all of the traditions and that left a
vacuum where people felt empty, uh, and not knowing what to do and postmodernism rushed
in to fill that vacuum, something like that. Yeah. Is that plausible? Do you think that that,
do you agree with that? Do you disagree with that? Well, I think that's, that's the story that
conservatives will tell and that, uh, some of the postmoderns also will tell. So if you think about
Nietzsche and his famous phrase that God is dead, you know, he does think that it's a, in one sense,
a good thing that God is dead, but he's also, uh, recognizing that the, the death of God has
happened too fast for most human beings, uh, and even sophisticated intellectual human beings who,
uh, become existentialists, you know, that for them, the death of God and all of the comforting stories
and narratives and values that are part of that package, uh, you know, if you are raised with
them and then suddenly you read a few books and you're 20 years old and it's all wrenched out and
your reason is telling you that God is dead and you don't have anything to replace that with, well, then
you're in a pretty dark place psychologically. So, um, so I do think, you know, the, the important,
the truth is that we do need to have values in place as we are living our lives and it's important
that they are healthy values. So, uh, you know, if you too quickly destroy all of your value framework
and don't have anything to replace it with, then you will be psychologically in a dark place. And
culturally, more broadly, if you have a large number of people who are doing the same sort of thing,
then you will, uh, destroy the institutions. But my view is not a, uh, it's not a, a conservative one.
Um, uh, I think that, uh, you know, as the modern world developed a lot of, uh, you know, non-religious
and more modern friendly value stories were being developed. Uh, so there were lots of positive, uh, options
available to them and people, when they surveyed their actual lives, they could see the concrete
improvements that were going on. Um, so I don't, uh, I don't think as a matter of intellectual history
that that's a very good account. Okay. I was asked about, um, because I was making a statement.
I don't know if we can, uh, counter postmodernism as I think of it as being rather destructive of our
society without a better story. I think that the, ultimately they're telling a story. Everybody's got
these different stories. So what, what's the best, the best story? And I understand that reason is
what's going to evaluate whether or not any given story is good. But somebody asked me, when will we
ever let go of our training wheels as a society? When, when will humankind let go of our training
wheels? Meaning, you know, religion, uh, broadly construed. But it feels like we're in a eternal
September where there's always just younger people or we're always being refreshed with people who don't
understand life or who are fools that need to be, need that wisdom passed on. And I just see that, uh,
narrative as the, the structure of passing on knowledge over and over again through time.
Right. Yeah. Well, I think, uh, one of the narratives is, uh, um, historical. And so, where I think history
education is important. So we do have a very powerful, uh, narrative that starts in the Renaissance
about taking the individual seriously and that we want to live a full lives and that we shouldn't be
captives of, uh, class, gender, and various other restrictions that have been placed on us.
Uh, that human beings are, are, are wonderful and, uh, with good education, they can really pursue
high dreams and make something of themselves. And that is a powerful narrative that we tell. And we
tell it a lot and it has, uh, succeeded very well over the course of the last, uh, uh, four centuries.
We also have the, uh, the science and technology narrative. And I think that also has been very
successful at some level. People recognize that, you know, all of the superstitions and all of the
crazy theories, uh, and, you know, religion does get a lot of blame here for holding us back
on and retarding the progress of science. That's not to say that all religion has to be so antagonistic
to, to science, but, uh, there's a lot of blame to, uh, to, to go around there, but we do have a
positive science and technology story. And we recognize that story. So, you know, the enlightenment
has been an awesome achievement. The Renaissance has been an awesome achievement and we're continuing to
make, uh, continuing to make progress. Uh, so I think the fact, uh, that we have a great Hollywood
movie industry that's now expanding and it's becoming multi-centered, but, you know, as much as
we like to be cynical and jaded and beat up on, on Hollywood movies, the fact is that we get wonderful
narratives from them that we resonate to them. We believe in the love story. We, we do, you know,
except for a few people, you know, gone through too many divorces or, or bad breakups, right? And so
forth. But that's a, that's a narrative. It is possible for decent people to find real love and
a happy ever after. It's not easy, but it is possible. And we believe in that. And we, uh,
we love the action stories and, you know, the competent, resourceful, smart, you know, James Bond,
Jason Bourne, uh, you run through it. We love that story and it's good versus evil and the good guy
wins. We believe in the triumph of good. So we do have all of these narratives, the Renaissance,
the enlightenment, the Hollywood movies. I think we still are largely in an enlightenment culture.
And, uh, you know, as you said, it is cyclical. We do have people who long for the, the good old
pre-modern days and the intellectual framework that supports that. We do have people who are
cynical and jaded and just want to burn the place down. Uh, and we have those people in every
generation, but we do also have the people who want to make a meaningful life and, uh, and we're,
we're enabling them to do so, you know, in a broad philosophical sense, uh, for those of you who have
studied the Greeks, uh, it is Plato versus Aristotle versus the sophists all over again. And every
generation has all three contingents, kind of the other worldly, the disworldly, and then the
skeptical relativists. And I think right now, of course, we're in a somewhat cynical, skeptical,
relativistic place in intellectual and high culture circles, but we do still have a lot of great
resources in the broader enlightenment culture.
