I only want to say one thing about the introduction. I think there must be at least 30 or 40 founders
of systems biology. And indeed, some of the most distinguished ones are here tonight,
and good to see them too. I grew up as a student at University College London, where I was
lectured by some very famous biologists indeed, including J.Z. Young, the great anatomist
and the discoverer of the squid giant axon that went on to be the work of Hodgkin and Huxley
in working out the nerve impulse, mathematical models and so on, and what got them the Nobel
Prize in 1963. And I learnt one thing very clearly from University College London, which
is that, by and large, lectures are useless. Two or three take-home messages is about all
you can get across in a single lecture. Well, today there's only one take-home message, and
that is the one that's in the question on the title or subtitle of the lecture.
Was the watchmaker completely blind? Some of you will have read the quite brilliantly
written books of Richard Dawkins, The Selfish Gene, but then later on, of course, The Blind
Watchmaker. And the standard view of evolutionary biology developed ever since August Weissman in
the end of the 19th century and right the way through the 20th century is that all variations
in the hereditary material, whatever it was found to be, was assumed to be random. And the only way,
therefore, in which an organism could develop that has functionality, if you wish to attribute a logic
to it, a kind of purpose to it, would be through natural selection, selecting out the good organisms,
as it were, and eliminating the bad organisms. And it's been a question ever since whether that
very strict separation between pure randomness at the level of the genetic material, followed by
natural selection, is really correct. And see if I get it to work. Yes. So I'm going to compare
in this brief talk, the standard view, which was developed during the 20th century,
blind chance followed by natural selection, therefore evolution having no foresight, with
what I call the 21st century view, for obvious reasons. I think we are beginning to understand
now that there are ways in which organisms can actually use stochasticity to generate function,
and therefore evolution can be, to some extent, directional. And I'm really going to divide the talk
into, for about 20 minutes, into just two parts. First of all, how organisms actually harness stochasticity,
and what I mean by harnessing, how they then respond to changes in the environment, stress,
by genome reorganisation of one kind or another. And then I will finish with the question, if there was
any kind of directionality, was there a kind of at least one-eyed watchmaker? Now, the question then is,
how did the approach that I favour, the integrative approach, become sidelined in the second half of
the 20th century? And the answer to that, of course, is that we were all of us, I include myself, because
I started off in this camp long ago, we were all attracted to an oversimplified view of the logic of
living systems. The mantra we all use, from molecules to man, and notice that's a one-way process. And the
problem is, this can't be true. Molecules simply aren't alive. Now, the origin of that goes, that idea
goes back a long way. The idea that you could derive the function of organisms entirely from their
molecules. Descartes stated it way back in his Treatise on the Fetus in 1665. Of course, he didn't
know about DNA, but he did think that there in the semen was the complete, he didn't use the word
program, but he could have used the word program for life. Laplace expressed the same kind of thing
in the 19th century. And the person who really got it all going in relation to modern molecular biology,
Schrodinger, who is greatly acknowledged by both Watson and Crick as having got it going. And what he did
in lectures to the Dublin Institute of Advanced Studies in the 1940s, was to propose, first of all,
quite correctly, that physics deals with order from disorder. There's the random movement of molecules,
like the gas molecules in this room, at the molecular level. But once you've got a constraint,
a vessel within which those molecules are constrained, you have a pressure, a volume,
and a temperature. You have the determinant laws of thermodynamics. So his point, first of all,
is that physics was order from disorder. But then he went on to say biology is completely different
because it's order from molecular order. Why did he think that? Well, first of all, he made what I
think was an exactly correct prediction, which is that when the genetic material was found, he didn't
know it was DNA then, but when it was found, it would be found to be a non-periodic crystal or an
a-periodic crystal. And if you think of a polymer as a kind of crystal, it's certainly non-periodic. It
contains a lot of information. And of course, these were the days of using x-ray crystallography to
determine crystal structure. All the work in this university of the distinguished work of Dorothy
Hodgkin and many others, of course, around the world was dominating the theme at that time. So he
formed the idea that that crystal, as he liked to call it, could be read in a determinate way,
just as you can use x-rays to get a structure from a crystal. And so the big question is,
does biology generate order from molecular order? Now, the alternative view is that that's not
possible, that life is a process, not fully programmed at the molecular level. And I would
contrast to Schrodinger's view and say that biology also, most of the time, there are very important
exceptions. But most of the time, biology must order, must also be generating order function from
disorder. And the reason for that is that stochasticity is a major feature of gene expression.
And we now know just how big stochasticity can be and how cells or populations of cells can harness
stochasticity. This is from a lovely paper by Chang and colleagues in Nature, looking at the distribution
of proteins in different cells in a multicellular population. It doesn't matter too much what the
protein is. You get the same kind of result for different proteins, although the range of expression
is different for different proteins. The range here is 1,000-fold. Neighbouring cells are differing in
expression by that much. Moreover, it's a population attractor. It's maintained perfectly well across a
period of, in this case, several weeks. Moreover, if you clone from the outliers, for example from the
high expressors, you will initially get cells that inherit the expression level of the high expression,
and within a week you're back to the original population. That is a population attractor.
Something is telling the population that that's the distribution to go to. Even more surprisingly,
if you find a bimodal peak and you clone from one of those peaks, you initially get
cells that express the same levels of expression as in the second of those peaks. But again, within
about a week you're back to the bimodal distribution. So populations of cells clearly have the ability
to, how best to put this, to at least be able to tell a population what the range of variability might be.
And I see that as being used by organisms in a very effective way because it gives organisms the
possibility of choosing, as the immune system does, as we'll see in a moment, which cells are most
appropriate to the function that the population needs to subserve. So now the question is, how is that
stochasticity actually harnessed? And the answer is, it's by providing a range of expression to enable responses
to stress. But that leaves the question, if I amplified a molecule up to be this sort of size,
the size of my fist, the edge of the cell will be way up in Aberdeen. How on earth does the genome know
about a process occurring at the cell surface? Well, of course, many biochemists and physiologists have
worked that out. I'm just going to give one example. This happens to be from work done by one of my former
colleagues in this university, Dick Chen, now working at New York University, showing precisely how
micro events near a protein channel at the surface membrane can, through a biochemical cascade,
go down through microfilaments with the motors that can transport the material right the way down to
the nucleus to make it possible to control gene expression. So we no longer have any particular
puzzle as to how that kind of transmission can occur. Does it occur? And now I want to go on to the
second part of this talk, which is, does genome reorganization occur in response to stress?
Well, the first thing to say is that one answer to that is very well known, has been known for a very
large number of years. And all immunologists will know what I'm going to refer to now. And that is
the possibility of targeted hypermutation. What do we mean by that? Let's go on to the next slide.
This is from a lovely review. I'll give the details of that review in a later slide. And what happens
if we look at the coding regions of the immunoglobulin that is involved in enabling the immune system cells
to respond to a new antigen is this, that parts of the molecule, those parts that actually make
it an immunoglobulin, function as an immunoglobulin, are held constant. They're not allowed to mutate,
or at least not deliberately, if you want to use the word deliberately about an organism.
But there is, of course, a variable part of the genome coding for that immunoglobulin,
where the rate of mutation in response to stress is hugely increased. And by huge, I mean 100,000 or
a million volt change. If the rest of the organism's genome was hypermutating at that rate, the organism
wouldn't survive. Indeed, if it was hypermutating at that rate in the whole of that sequence
for the immunoglobulin, it would also not survive. And that review, for those who want to
access it, is Odegaard and Schatz published in 2006. As they say, the somatic hypermutation needs to be
targeted specifically to immunoglobulin genes, and not only to immunoglobulin genes, but obviously
just the part that is highly variable. Now, what does that mean? It means that inside cells,
particularly the immune system cells, we have a kind of fruit machine. I don't know whether
the younger people of the audience now even know what a fruit machine is. It used to be a machine that
led to spending many coins, spinning the wheels in a hope that you could get
a reward back by getting three lemons or three pineapples or whatever it might be. And of course,
the way you achieved that, if you were clever enough, was to see that if you've got two lemons
on one or on two of the wheels, you held those and proceed to spin the other. And that's exactly what
the hypermutation mechanism is doing. Now, the point about that is very simple. It is that in effect,
and we'll come on to Barbara McClintock, in effect, what you're doing is importing directionality
in the process, even though you're using stochasticity. So, part of the take-home message here
is that stochasticity necessarily co-exists with functionality, and they exist at different
levels. See, if you were looking, imagine yourself as a very tiny microbe indeed that looks just at the
region that is hypermutating, you will see random mutation. You will also see, if you're looking at the
cells of that population, you will see that only those cells that achieve the result of being able to
bind to the antigen are going to be the ones that are allowed to survive. And the point I'm making there
is you've got a purely neo-Darwinist mechanism at one level. At the genome level, what you're seeing is
random mutation followed by natural selection. So, I'm not saying that mechanism does not work. It does.
But I am saying that over and above that, there is targeting of the process that enables it to be
possible to generate functionality from the random behavior. Now, finally, I want to emphasize that it's
also possible for organisms to respond to stress in the environment by reorganizing genomes. And this was
first discovered by Barbara McClintock many years ago. She was working
on corn in the 1930s and 1940s. She was actually told about 1957 that she shouldn't continue to publish
on that process because people simply didn't believe what she had found. What she had found is the great
chunks of the genetic material could move from one chromosome to the other in response to environmental
stress. Thirty years later, in 1983, she was awarded the Nobel Prize at the age of 81 precisely for the
discovery of mobile genetic elements. And she wrote in her Nobel Prize lecture published in Science
that the genome is a highly sensitive organ of the cell, monitoring genomic activities and correcting
common errors, sensing the unusual and unexpected events and responding to them often by restructuring
the genome. Has that happened? Well, if we look at the sequencing of many different species,
including, of course, the human, done by the Human Genome Project and published in Nature in 2001,
and you look at a range of proteins from yeast to worm to fly right the way through to the human,
and this is looking at the domains that exist in chromatin proteins, what you find is that whole domains,
these are the stars that I'm now putting up, there are many of them, whole domains have moved around.
This is precisely, of course, Barbara McClintock's discovery. Now, the point here is that whole domains have
functionality. You have a much bigger chance of getting new functionality if you're combining bits of
the genome that already have functionality. And the way to think of that, I think, is the way you might
think about two children given Lego bricks in a competition to build a bridge. And to one child,
you give the original little Lego bricks so that you've got to, the child has to laboriously construct
arches and so on to make suitable architectural features. To the other child, you give a sequence
of a series of already constructed Lego parts. It's blindingly obvious that the second child is going
to get to the structure very much more quickly. I'm suggesting that evolution is done exactly the same.
And now, very quickly, I'll just draw attention to three examples of how that occurs in
in single organism, in unicellular organisms. This comes from work of Boss and their colleagues published
in PNAS just a couple of years ago, highlighting what they call a rapid evolution of genome change in
response to unfavorable environments. This, of course, is what is giving us a scare about
resistance to antibiotics by bacteria. A second example from the work done in Reading recently,
also from 2015 and published in Science, the restoration of motility in response to
deleting one of the regulatory genes that controls the expression of the proteins that
create and make the flagelli. Within four days, the organisms know, if you want to use know in inverted
commas, how to generate, regenerate the flagelli. It's within just four days.
And the final one I've got is this lovely study, also from 2015, published in PNAS with the comment
in the article, cells possess specific mechanisms to optimise their genome in response to the environment.
So, was the watchmaker blind? And this is what I want to finish on.
It depends on the viewpoint you take. If you look, as I emphasised a bit earlier on,
at the genome level where the mutations are occurring, so you focus on where the hypermutation is occurring,
either in immune cells or in bacterial cells or other unicellular organisms in response to stress,
you will see random variation. You will also see natural selection. But if you look at it from a
high level perspective, a functional perspective, you will see that the targeted nature of the
hypermutation is precisely what gives the functionality. So, I would say that organisms
have evolved the ability or have been subjected to evolution and they've eventually got the ability to
respond in functional ways to environmental change. And therefore, if you want to ask,
was the watchmaker blind? I would say he's one-eyed. But the interesting thing is that watchmakers usually
are one-eyed, of course. They do what you see here, focusing, of course, just through one eye.
It's just a metaphor, of course, and the rest of my talk is in the book itself.
So, the take-home message is that I think we have to rethink the question of blind stochasticity.
Stochasticity is completely compatible with functionality at a high level. Physics taught us
that right from the beginning. Schrodinger got that part of his story in What is Life? Correct.
But stochasticity can be harnessed by organisms and they can do it in a way that generates
physiological, functionally significant ways of responding to stress in the environment.
And that's the end of my talk. And I'm looking forward to some
very challenging questions, comments, and so on from the audience. Thank you very much.
So, now we'll be moving on to our discussion session. So, I read Dennis' book and I prepared some questions and then afterwards we'd like to encourage the audience to ask some questions and participate as well in the discussion.
So, you propose in the book this idea of biological relativity, which suggests that selection can occur at
any scale, not just at the level of the gene. So, do you reject the gene as the only unit of
selection? And can you describe how a multi-level selection can happen?
The way I would see it, Tony, is this, that how does selection work? It works through death and
life. What survives is what is selected for. What's let to die disappears. Now, the process of dying isn't
actually a function of genes. It's a function of the organism. So, it seems to me to be blindingly obvious
that selection at the very least must be occurring at the level of the organism. But the same point can
apply to populations. Populations in different ways are in competition. And again, it's quite possible
for a group of organisms forming a population not to survive, while another does. And there can be
competition at that level too. There's a lovely book by the philosopher, sorry about the philosophers,
Hagen. This man was trained at Balliol though. Samir Okasha, who is a very good philosopher of biology
at Bristol University, has a lovely book called Multiple Levels of Selection. And I think he's got it
broadly right. Incidentally, Samir Okasha doesn't actually himself, unlike me, dissent from the
standard story. He says that multi-level selection is the standard evolutionary story. So, I don't think
you need, actually, to dissent from the standard evolutionary story to think in terms of levels of
selection. And it seems to me to be obvious that the way in which natural selection works is through
life and death. And so, it's the things that live and die that are the target of evolution.
Okay, and this other idea that you mentioned about directional evolution. So, from what we've been
taught, we've always thought about mutations as being highly random. And, you know, there are
mutations I thought of being neutral and random. And you have the evolution of things like pseudogenes.
Yeah. Or proteins that gain function, but then you also have proteins that lose their catalytic
function, for instance. Yeah. So, how would you reconcile your ideas with this?
Well, first of all, and I do this in the book, I actually challenge the extent to which
things are purely random. Let me explain what I mean there. Because, so far, I've stressed that you can have
stochasticity at a low molecular level, at a genome level, for example, and protein level,
compatible with functionality at a high level. But, you see, a clever mathematician would say to me,
but wait a minute, Dennis, that can't be the whole story. Because, take that molecule that is sensing
the edge of the cell right up there in Aberdeen is constrained by that, and by very many other
structures in the cell. So, it can't actually be entirely random. I'm being a devil advocate against
myself for a moment. And with that, I entirely agree. But the difficulty is that if you're looking
at the molecules, you will see stochasticity. It's a very difficult question to define precisely what
is stochasticity, and a very difficult question to ask, you know, is it a kind of metaphysical
property of the universe, or is it something that is just our knowledge of the universe? But we don't
need to get into that deep problem before we can see that if the constraints are fairly subtle,
you're not going to see it at the molecular level. Now, of course, it might be the case that if
somebody wanted to take on the huge computational problem of from the molecular level representing
all the molecules in a cell to compute what is going on, in principle, those constraints will appear.
They'll appear in the differential equations, which is why I said that a mathematician would say this.
How do they appear? They appear in the initial and boundary conditions. You cannot solve the
differential equations for the movement of a set of molecules without imposing the initial and
boundary conditions. The constraints from the environment are precisely those conditions. The
constraint from the history of the organism is precisely the initial conditions. So I think that I'd
want to challenge whether things are truly random. And that gets us into some very deep philosophical and mathematical problems.
Maybe I can challenge you a bit more on this point.
So I think mutations that accumulate in the germline will accumulate regardless of whether there is selection or there isn't selection, just due to
issues of the DNA replication and failure to fix some of the mutations that are introduced.
So I think even in the absence of selection, you can get mutations right accumulating at a steady rate, and different organisms will accumulate mutations at different rates.
And I agree with you that this is highly dependent on the organism themselves.
Small animals at a high metabolic rate will accumulate mutations faster. But I think even in the absence of selection, you will still have these mutations that are occurring.
Indeed. And let me make clear, I'm not arguing against that. This is Motokunora's theory of neutral evolution. And I think that was a great contribution to the development of evolutionary biology, something like 50, I don't know the exact number of years ago, 50 or 60 years ago.
So I'm not arguing that that doesn't happen. And indeed, my quarrel with the standard theory is not that it is not working. It is that it's not all that is working.
So I think your point is well taken, Tianyi, and I agree with it. So I'm not arguing against the neutral theory of evolutionary change. And indeed, I think that also can be used by organisms.
Because when you look at the question of what some people call niche construction and niche evolution, you've got a version of that, because you've got what might have been, as it were, from any functional point of view, the random changes that have been occurring in a neutral way up to a certain point.
But that doesn't stop them at some stage being useful to a group of organisms that go off in a particular new niche or even create a new niche.
So I'm not arguing that what you are saying is wrong. I'm saying that it isn't the whole story.
Yeah.
So, from a couple of the slides, you showed that your genome organization can occur quite readily in bacteria.
But how can the eukaryotic organism overcome the Weissman barrier?
And for those of you that don't know, the Weissman barrier is just the barrier that prevents acquired mutations from the cells in our body being passed on to those in our germ line.
So things that happen to other parts of our body will not be passed on to our children.
So, does evolution differ in prokaryotic versus eukaryotic organisms?
I think it has to.
So, once again, I think I'm going to start by agreeing with you that there's a big problem there.
And indeed, Darwin saw exactly this problem.
Let me just backtrack a little to Weissman and Darwin because I think it's very important to explain, as you've partly done already, and thank you, some of the history of this.
August Weissman, together with Alfred Wallace, was one of the first people to, as it were, narrow down Darwin's theory of evolution.
Darwin's theory of evolution, as we well know, was founded on his idea of natural selection.
But it's very interesting to note that when you read the various editions of The Origin of Species carefully,
there are many places in The Origin of Species where he accepts the inheritance of acquired characteristics.
Darwin never quarreled with Lamarck about that question.
He quarreled with Lamarck about a totally different question, which was, does evolution have any kind of directionality?
In other words, was there what Lamarck called a pouvoir de la vie, a force of life, if you wish to call it that.
Now, what August Weissman argued was something that Darwin also himself realised,
which is that if a change occurs in the soma, in the eye, for example, or the heart,
how on earth could it ever be the case that it might be transmitted to the germline in organisms that have a separate germline?
Now, of course, I focused in my brief talk on the microorganisms and on the immune system
because you can there, as it were, study the evolutionary process without there being a separate germline
in relation to either the development or evolution of immune system cells within an organism over its lifetime,
but that doesn't transmit to future generations, or the way in which microorganisms respond to stress.
But, obviously, there's a very different question where you have the issue of what passes down through the germline.
Now, Darwin's solution to the problem is very, very interesting
because it's very close to what we've found with some epigenetic mechanisms today.
What Darwin wrote in a subsequent book after The Origin of Species,
he wrote a book on the domestication of animals and plants.
It's not widely known, as much as it should be, that he had a theory
for precisely how the soma could communicate with the germline.
And his theory is what he called the theory of gemmules.
Of course, he was making up a word.
And what he'd mean by gemmules, it was that particles might pass down through the blood
from the soma, generally, to the germline.
We now know, of course, that RNAs do exactly that.
So can epigenetic marking.
Now, I'll just describe one example of this that is really illustrative of how big a change this can be.
Harvey and his colleagues, in an article published in Cell just about four years ago,
studied planarian worms.
Now, they're tiny, but they're multicellular, and they certainly have a germline.
And what they did was to study the response to a viral invasion,
which is to produce an RNA that silences the virus.
Now, that will only happen, of course, if those planarians have the DNA required to make that RNA.
They then did something very clever.
They crossed those worms that already had the viral silencing response with wild-type worms,
some of which would have the DNA necessary to make the RNA silencer, and some of which do not.
And then, as you think about it, as you go down through those generations having crossed,
you'll eventually get to generations in which some will have the DNA,
because they've inherited it in the right way, and some will not.
That's a matter, of course, of Mendelian genetic probabilities.
The interesting thing is that all of them inherit the viral silencing mechanism.
How do they do it?
The RNA passes down through the sperm line, and it gets amplified in each generation by RNA polymerase,
so you've got the silencing mechanism still there.
That went on for a whole year, which was a hundred generations of planarians.
And there's no dilution of that?
Well, now we come to a very interesting question.
There was no dilution in that case.
But I think you're raising a very, very important question, Jenny,
because most of the epigenetic changes that have been shown to be inherited,
and there's quite a large number of such examples now.
There are whole books on transgenerational epigenetic effects.
Most of them are transient.
So you're raising a very important point.
And that is sometimes presented as an argument for saying,
well, it's really not likely or not possible for such epigenetic changes to be a major cause of evolution.
But you see, I don't think the experiments reproduce what would be occurring during evolution.
Because think about it.
If you, as for example was done by Joe Nadeau and his colleagues
investigating the inheritance of epigenetic effects in mice with APOBEC1 deficiency.
Sorry about the technical terms there.
You don't have to understand all of that sentence for a moment,
except to know that they were investigating the transmission of an epigenetic effect.
It was actually very, very strong and almost as strong as the transmission of standard genetic effects.
That article is published in PNAS together with a very important commentary article.
And those who want can either find the reference in the book or they can email me and I'll give them the reference.
Now, why do I refer to that?
They were looking at an experiment, which is how many of these transgenerational epigenetic experiments are done,
in which you expose the organism to a particular environmental stress in one generation.
Now, think about that for a moment.
Occasionally you will find, as Joe Nadeau and his colleagues did, that it is transmitted down many generations.
But I don't think you would expect it to be so generally, because why would that be of interest to an evolutionary process?
It will only be of interest to an evolutionary process if the environmental change makes it valuable to continue that change.
But then you've got the same thing, the same environment encouraging that particular epigenetic change for many, many generations.
Now, I come to a very important developmental biologist, Conrad Waddington, who showed way back in the 1950s, and it's in his beautiful book,
The Strategy of the Genes, published in 1957.
He showed how such epigenetic changes, he was indeed the originator of the word epigenetics, can then be, as he put it, assimilated into the genome,
essentially by the process of bringing various alleles, that is gene variants, together in the right way, if you want to use the word right way,
for a particular characteristic to be inherited.
So, this gets very technical, but what I'm saying is that I don't think experiments in which you look at a single generation exposure
will give you real clues to how important epigenetic effects might have been in evolution.
The much better way, I think, is to look at, as Michael Skinner and his colleagues have done very recently,
this is again experiments done in the United States,
they took the icon of Darwin's evolutionary biological ideas, which of course were the tortoises and finches of the Galapagos Islands,
and they studied five of the species of finch that Darwin originally based his theory on.
And you can plot the results for both DNA change and epigenetic marking change as a function of phylogenetic distance between the organisms.
And what you find is that both correlate with the phylogenetic distance.
If you really want to say, does one correlate better with the other, it's actually the case that the epigenetic one correlates slightly better than the DNA change.
I wrote to Michael Skinner and said, well, do you know which came first?
And he said, well, we'll never know.
They interact, as Waddington showed many, many, many years ago.
So, I think we need to see evolution, therefore, as using whatever mechanisms are there, and they can interact.
And I don't see there's a need, as it were, to say, well, it's all epigenetic, it's all DNA.
But we ought to really try and open up to the audience, oughtn't we?
Yes.
My hearing is not very good, so I'll come and be a bit closer.
Yes.
I just want to make some comments that you can reflect on.
And that is, the effects of stochastic fluctuations in cells depends very much on how large the cell is.
Yes, yes.
So, a small bacterium, the natural fluctuations that come from the noisy nature of molecular reactions can have a huge effect.
Yes.
Right?
If you go 10 times, 100 times larger to a yeast cell, the effect of the fluctuations is proportionally smaller.
And go to mammalian cells, the fluctuations may be completely negative.
Well, they're not, actually, but that's just a matter of fact.
What I heard you saying was, actually, in corn and in humans, in the immune system, actually,
the cells have created ways to make the fluctuations really large.
No, the SCA1 experiment is done in mammalian cell line.
So, these are eukaryotes.
Aha.
So, the coming back to the distribution.
The thousand-fold distribution was in eukaryote, yes.
Okay.
Do those cells have special mechanisms for amplifying the fluctuations so they can make those changes so fast?
Well, I don't, the honest answer is I don't know.
I mean, what seems to me to be clear from Chang's work, and it's actually Sui Huang is the key author there,
is this, that what's clear from those results I showed you is that the range of stochasticity is a population property.
So, yes, you'll have individual cells showing this degree of expression or that degree of expression,
but it's only when you study the distribution in the whole population, which they were doing, of course, with markers of the protein.
I've forgotten which it is, but it's one of the fluorescent markers, that you will see the range of the stochasticity.
Now, I'd agree with you one point, which is that, of course, depending on the particular protein you take,
the range of stochasticity may be much smaller than in that example.
In my own area, for example, the variation in the number of potassium channels in heart cells as you go across the ventricular wall is indeed there.
It is variation, but it's not a thousand-fold. Most of the cells will have a reasonable number of potassium channels,
and I think those who record from single cells isolated from hearts will know.
Of course, you will get different amounts of potassium channel in different cells,
but you don't normally find a variation as large as a thousand.
So, I'm not arguing that all cells will show as big a range as the SCA1 protein,
but what I am saying is that if you've got stochasticity and it is a function of the population, you've got an attractor.
And therefore, it's a function of the population, not of an individual cell.
I think that's all I'm claiming, and all I need to claim at the moment.
Okay? Yes.
I hope that's water, not so tarn.
Yes, thank you.
We have a question over there.
Hello.
Yes.
I'm afraid I failed to see exactly the importance of the contribution you're making to evolutionary biology,
because in evolutionary biology we often employ something called the phenotypic gambit.
What it means is that we don't make any assumptions about the genetics behind the traits we're looking at.
We assume that there are strategies, various strategies that organisms can choose between,
and we look at their fitness payoffs and so on.
We can parameterize that by experiments.
But we don't specify how many loci involved or the interactions involved are.
And this paradigm which employs mathematics from economics...
This is population genetics?
No, no.
This employs mathematics from economics, so game theory and mathematics.
I think that's what I mean.
Mathematics.
It's different to population genetics.
Well, okay.
Yes, but I know the equations you're talking about.
So we use this to make predictions about what the phenotypes of organisms should be,
based on the fitness effects of those phenotypes.
Yes.
So we don't make any assumptions about what the genetics are.
And this paradigm has led to some beautiful predictions, particularly in the areas of sex allocation,
and through inclusive fitness theory and social evolution,
about the kind of behavior of the phenotype we expect to see.
And they're demonstrated empirically.
So we could say that these things are occurring as a result of epigenetic changes,
or via changes on a 1,6 chromosome, or on the autosomes,
or even indeed with endosymbiotics existing inside the cells.
And so what I'm trying to convey is I don't really see how focusing on the mechanisms exactly by which inheritance is taking place
and adding too much sea evolution in biology, because our predictions are already quite good.
And sort of the assumption we say is that it's likely over time that a...
I'll give one example, a specific example.
The classic population genetics difficulty is that heterozygote advantage may prevent optimization occurring in organisms.
For example, sickle cell anemia, the heterozygote is more fit than both the homozygotes.
How do you... how do you get around that?
Well, over the issue of time, it's likely that some sort of gene duplication may take place,
and that would overcome a heterozygote advantage, and we would then see the fittest phenotype emerging.
So we assume that something like that is going to happen over the issue of time to provide the optimal solution in the end.
So, yeah, I fairly see exactly what kind of contribution we're making.
Yes, and I think the problem is that you have already, in a sense, given the game away,
because you're saying it doesn't matter what the molecular mechanism is.
Now, what that tells me is you're operating with a definition of a gene that depends on the phenotype.
You're talking about a trait, not a DNA sequence.
Now, I come to a very, very important point, which I emphasize a lot in my book.
There is an absolutely fundamental difference between the original definition of a gene like that,
which is the phenotypic trait, which is Johansson's definition in his classic paper of 1909,
and the definition of a gene in terms of a sequence of DNA.
So I agree with you in a sense.
In a sense, it wouldn't matter, from the point of view of the equations that you use,
whether it's DNA or not.
But what does matter is this.
If you think about it, Johansson also said, exactly like you've just said in his paper in 1909,
it doesn't matter what it is.
He says it can be anything in the organism.
And he actually uses the German for that, Einetwas.
Anything you like.
Now, think about that.
That means that a gene defined in that way is necessarily the cause of the phenotype,
because it is the phenotype.
That's how it's defined.
You can't do any experiment that would test for a hypothesis that is based on a definition of a gene that says that it's a necessary cause of the phenotype.
Because as you said, if you find that you have to incorporate symbiosis or any other kind of property, any other mechanism,
again, it's Johansson's Einetwas, anything at all, you will do so.
That's exactly what Richard Dawkins does in his debate with Lynn Margulis recorded by Voices from Oxford in 2009.
I chaired that debate, incidentally, and I thought that was a very significant point in the points he made.
The big difference, therefore, is this.
If you define a gene, Johans' original definition, in terms of the phenotype, the trait,
there's no experiment that will tell you whether that's the cause or not, because it isn't necessarily the cause.
Of course, you can ask questions like, does it follow Mendelian genetics or not?
Mendelian ratios, that's a proper empirical question.
Some do, some don't.
However, if you define a gene as a DNA sequence, which is what, of course, the molecular biologists now do,
you've got a very different definition of a gene.
First of all, you have omitted all of the other properties of the cell that are inherited as well as the DNA.
And remember, we never inherit DNA alone.
We always inherit the rest of the cell as well.
So it's necessarily the case that the rest of the cell structure is inherited.
Now I come to the very important point.
If you define gene in this rather limited molecular biological way, and I don't mean that in a perjurative way,
I think it was necessary for the molecular biologists to define genes in the way that they now do.
So I'm not arguing against people having done that.
But it then becomes an empirical question whether it produces an effect at the phenotype level or not.
When I do experiments on knocking out or blocking particular mechanisms in the pacemaker in the heart,
I can easily demonstrate, as I've done over many years, and as many of my colleagues working on cardiac rhythm have been able to do,
that from those knockout experiments, or those block experiments, you will not necessarily get a good quantitative estimate
of the functionality of that particular protein or gene in the function, the rhythm of the heart.
You can knock out a mechanism that is contributing 80% of the depolarizing current that is generating the rhythm,
and you'll get only a 10 to 15% change in frequency.
That incidentally has now been the basis of the development of a very good cardiac drug by the pharmaceutical company Servier
to treat patients who have too high a heart rhythm, particularly when they're exercising and pouring out a lot of adrenaline,
because that particular mechanism is greatly enhanced by adrenaline.
Now, the difference between 10 or 15% and 80% is huge.
No biologist should really be satisfied with that, but it gets worse.
Look at the study in yeast by Hillenmayer and his colleagues in 2008,
sweeping through as many of the 6,000 genes as they could in yeast, knocking out one after the other.
Under normal physiological, well-nourished conditions, 80% of the knockouts are silent.
It doesn't mean they haven't got physiological function, it just means the system is so well backed up
that other networks take over the function of the backed up one.
Now, come to the key difference, and this I think is the real answer to what you've raised.
You could not ask those kinds of questions about Johansson's definition of a gene.
You can only ask those kinds of questions about the modern molecular biological definition of a gene.
And the key point that I'm making, it's elaborated in much, much more detail than I can do here in a talk in the book,
is that the kinds of question of physiological and biochemical and evolutionary biological experiments that you can form
to test those two views of a gene are utterly different.
Now, I come to the final point I want to make on this particular issue.
That is where Richard Dawkins goes wrong.
You see, he confuses the two definitions of a gene.
He likes the idea, I like it too, that you've got a replicator in the DNA,
which we all know about, and the mechanisms of replication.
And you've got the carrier of the DNA, which is the rest of the cell or the rest of the organism.
Of course, if you used Johansson's definition of a gene, that could not possibly apply.
Johansson's definition, remember, would include all the networks as well as the DNA sequence.
So, it matters enormously, and particularly, to selfish gene theory.
Because, in selfish gene theory, you have to distinguish between the replicator and the vehicle.
If you use Johansson's original definition of a gene, there is no such distinction.
And that's a fundamental difference.
Sorry, I have a follow-up question.
Yes, please.
Yeah.
So, does selection only occur on phenotypic traits?
Is that what you're proposing?
Because you can only select things that you can see.
It's only phenotypes that die.
So you come back to the thing I said at the very beginning.
You see, if you ask the mechanism of natural selection,
it is that some organisms survive better than others and reproduce more than others.
So, it's necessarily true that you can only say that selection sees what can live or die.
Now, can a virus die?
It doesn't live, either, does it, outside the cell?
You can see where I'm driving at.
I mean, this is the very beginning of the lecture, of course, that molecules, as such, are dead.
And, of course...
But viruses can evolve.
They do, indeed.
Of whether they survive or not.
Indeed.
Well, they evolve by being able to reproduce themselves inside a cell.
So, I mean, that's a technical point, which we both agree on.
So, what I'm trying to point out here is very simply this, that at whatever level something can live or die,
it seems to me that natural selection can act.
I think that's what Darwin was saying.
That is the theory of natural selection.
And, as I said right at the beginning, it seems to me that that can occur at any level.
Now, I know that my colleague, Richard, would like to think it's always genes that are selected for,
and he's argued beautifully and brilliantly for that view.
But I think it's a fundamental mistake.
As, indeed, I think it was a fundamental mistake to attribute an anthropomorphic term like selfish to a piece of DNA.
You know, I'm sometimes a pretty selfish bloke.
But I'm only a good selfish bloke if you can describe a selfish bloke as good.
Let's just say I want my Sautern.
If, at the same time, all my genes and proteins are cooperating in me.
It is simply not correct to transfer the attribute of selfishness from a level of a molecule to the level of an organism.
And, again, I think that is blindingly obvious.
You need cooperativity in order to have selfish individuals.
Do we have any other questions?
If not, let's thank Dennis for our discussion.
Thank you.
Have a great day.
Take care.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
