Welcome to PSY back to the future.
Let me read you what this is about from the website in case you haven't, and let's go for it.
So the scientific study of psychic or PSY phenomena, which includes extrasensory perception,
precognition, synchronicities, direct mind to mind communication, or mind to matter interactions,
amongst others, has been going on for more than a century now.
Its results are fascinating, but also puzzling and controversial.
In this event, some of the greatest active researchers in the field will present their work
while reflecting on where PSY has been, where we think it is now, and where we wish it to go.
We hope to create an unprecedented audiovisual gathering for current and future generations
to get perspective, clarity, and inspiration.
All right.
I'm so lucky that about 18 people who are working on these matters agreed to come in
tonight to tell us really briefly about really whatever they felt was appropriate.
It could be their own research from many years ago.
It could be what they're working on now.
It could be ideas they have for the future.
It's really open, but I happen to know and be part of this community.
And I feel we don't often have like a public platform or venue to just just tell each other
and also to a greater audience what we're doing, where we're struggling, why we're so
fascinating by studying these, how we're coping with the pseudoscience label, why this is important for
science and humanity and so on.
So that's what we're going to do tonight.
Let me tell you a bit about the structure of this event, because we had something like this in terms of
structure in December when we had this anniversary of Jacobo Greenberg's work.
work and I liked it.
It's like a marathon.
We'll be here for about four hours, maybe five.
You don't need to be here all the time.
This is being recorded.
You can leave.
You can come back.
You will receive the recording and actually about 645 people registered.
I see we are more than 100 now, but nearly 700 people registered.
So they will all get the recording and then we'll upload it on YouTube and more people will
watch it, but the structure is going to be interesting because as I was saying, we only
have 15 minutes.
Each speaker will only have 15 minutes approximately and that's unfair to them, but I thought that's
fair to the rest of us as an audience, because I don't know how expert you are in these matters,
but this feels like you're going now to a sushi restaurant and you're going to have a tasting
of different people, different perspectives, different themes, and it will be only
be 15 minutes.
So if you like it, then you can double click, find the work of the person and study more.
And if you're not so enticed, then wait for the other one.
So yeah, we're going to be doing this for the next hours.
We'll have a break at about two hours time.
What else do I need to say about the structure?
Yes, there will not be time for Q&A.
Sorry about that, but I feel if we open it for Q&A, then we need to open it for everyone.
And so we'll be here for eight hours and you don't want that.
Instead, let's use the chat.
Let's use the fact that we're all live here.
At least 138 people now, maybe more coming.
And post your questions in the chat for researchers.
Answer them or even include links to papers, your website.
Let's have the chat very active.
And so that could be a place while we're having the presentation where a lot is going on
instead of having questions.
Let me also say, I know some of you, some very familiar faces, but there'll be people who are not
from the party galaxy or system yet.
And so I have no idea really who the audience will be.
And so that's why this needs to be broad as well.
And we will see who's there.
And I think that's all for the format.
One more thing.
Yes.
There are some of the speakers who are coming today.
It's interesting.
Two or three have had like a last minute urgency and won't be able to jump.
Or maybe if they are, they'll let me know through private message and I will let them in.
I asked them anyways to record 15 minutes and we will include these in the recording.
So you'll have more when you get it.
And let me add to this.
If someone is here and feels that he or she has been working on PSI research and I didn't invite
him or her and really wants to make a contribution, write me an email with your 10, 15 minute recording
and we'll include it as well.
I didn't mean to be exclusive.
It's just that this is the community I know.
And this is the community I've invited.
All right.
So let me now tell you, and this will be really my presentation, but it's not a presentation.
It's just part of the introduction.
Why I'm interested in this.
As some of you know, in 2021, I had a near-death experience and when I recovered from it, I wondered
how can I integrate that personal experience in my life?
And that takes some work.
And despite the curse of nearly having died, it's a blessing.
But I also asked myself, how do I integrate this thing that I saw and what it meant into my professional
life?
And ironically, I had got tenure a few months before I almost died.
So that would have been funny.
You get tenure and then you die.
And so I decided, well, look, now I have this other opportunity, maybe 40 more years.
Because that happened when I was 39.
And so I'm not really going to study what I'm truly not just curious about, but I think it's
very important.
And I'm going to ask, what does this near-death experience tell me about what I've been taught
as a physicist and what I've been taught as a neuroscientist?
And this kind of simple goal brought me into a very interesting rabbit hole because, well,
what happens with the mind when the brain dies?
If you're a materialist, the answer is the mind dies, period.
We don't need to talk.
We could go home now.
But if the brain, as I've also said before, and I think you've heard me say that, if the
brain is a permissive organ rather than a productive one, right?
If the brain allows, filters, receives mind as opposed to generating it as a machine would
generate smoke, then what happened to me and many others in that NDE is most likely not a
hallucination.
It tells us something very fascinating about this strange relationship between mind and matter
and about this split, this gap we've been carrying over for 400 years since science started.
Now, the corollary to this is that you don't need to die in order to experience
these anomalous experiences that defy this relationship between mind and matter.
So many people have synchronicities.
They sometimes feel, they sense what another person was thinking.
They sometimes have the experience that they may be influencing what happens
in the world with their minds.
So what do we do with that?
What has been done for many years is to tell those people in the name of science
that they are either crazy or stupid.
But I guess most of us, I suppose maybe all of us here tonight,
know that's not just unfair and unethical perhaps, but probably wrong.
So that's why I started investigating what's out there and my surprise was double.
First, I realized there is science done on this.
I'm really a newcomer.
Like in 2021, I started reading what has been written about NDEs and psychical phenomena.
And I discovered a lot has been written.
Many books, many papers, many peer reviewed papers, many papers with high standards.
All right.
So there's the science of this.
I really didn't know.
I had no idea.
I didn't care.
I didn't try to bend spoons when I was young.
I didn't have, you know, visitors in my room.
I wasn't interested in UFOs.
It just wasn't in my radar, but now it was.
And I discovered there's science done on it.
And not only science, even more beautifully,
I discovered there's a community of scientists and some of them are here tonight with us.
And I feel grateful to them because they embrace me in this new community.
And we're not that many, actually, maybe this comes out throughout tonight,
but to give you a, to give you a sense.
And I don't know where this number comes from,
but somebody did an estimate of how much funding psychical research has received over the last
hundred and so years, because this has been going on since William James.
And maybe I'm wrong, but the order of magnitude is what matters here.
It was about like the total amount of money spent in studying this phenomena
in the entire history of more than a hundred years, including everyone.
It's about three months of funding for psychology today.
So you take what will be spent in psychology, January, February, and March this year.
You put all that money into a big box and that's what's been spent to study these things.
Some skeptics will say, and that's a good thing because there's nothing to see there.
So let's not put more money.
I think most of us believe that, well, look, knowing about what happens when we die,
knowing about whether there's scientific evidence for reincarnation and there is,
knowing about whether our minds can perceive the world through other senses than the five
sanctioned sentence.
All of that is not just interesting.
It's very important.
And so let's be curious about it.
Okay.
So this is, this is really my introduction motivation for why I'm doing this.
And, and now it's going to be interesting when I start fishing from the audience, the speakers.
So Dean Radin was going to be with us, but he cannot come.
Tonight, probably we received, we will receive a recording.
The next one in my list that, that feels like school, like going through the list,
was Cedric Canard, who also had an emergency.
Hopefully we'll be able to insert the presentation.
So the next one I have in my list is Damon Abraham.
And if you can spotlight or raise your hand so I can find you.
I'm trying to, I'm trying to find you.
Um, all right, you're, you're there.
Thank you very much.
Fantastic.
Now I'll spotlight you to do.
I'll make you.
Yeah.
All right.
I'll ask every speaker to give us a brief introduction of who you are, your path while
you're here.
And then the floor is yours.
If you need to share, um, I'll make you cohost so that you can also share
your slides.
And Damon, I thank you very much for coming here tonight.
The floor is yours.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Uh, it's, it's wonderful to be here.
Um, and I gotta say, I'm really, really excited to be first in the list.
It takes all the pressure off.
Yeah.
But at least I don't have to follow Dean Radin.
That's, I guess that's a plus.
Um, yeah.
So I, I'm Damon Abraham.
I'm a researcher, a PhD psychologist, uh, my mainstream psychology research kind of centers
around emotion, cognition, uh, emotion, cognition, interaction, and mental representation.
Um, the way I arrived at that route really came actually through more of my, uh, paranormal
types of experiences, having out of body experiences that were quite lucid and, and hyper real, uh,
having some experiences in studying the occult, um, and really wanting to get a stronger methodological
framework to, um, try to understand and study these types of phenomena more formally.
Uh, which is the reason I, I decided to go and get a PhD in a, in a related field.
Um, but I've been, you know, uh, involved in the parapsychological community for quite some time.
Uh, my interests in this area are, are really quite broad.
So, um, I, I, I guess if you kind of want to distill it down, it's really about
for me consciousness or the non-local aspects of consciousness.
So everything from non-local perception or, you know, the apparent non-local, uh,
transference of information through things like, um, clairvoyance and remote viewing and precognition
as well as non-local actions.
So we have, uh, micro and macro forms of psychokinesis, the ability to apparently influence
objects.
We have, uh, distant and anomalous forms of healing.
Uh, and then we have all of these weird phenomena that, um, Alex has already kind of mentioned
the things like near death experiences and out of body experiences, um, all of these types
of like first person subjective experiences that give us a sense that, uh, we're more than
just our physical body, um, that consciousness is, is it's much broader and much larger.
So, um, with that, I'll, I'll just share some slides, um, and talk a little bit about my approach
here.
Just a moment.
Okay.
Hopefully, hopefully you can see this.
So I would say, broadly speaking, I, I borrow the framework from, uh, some of my friends at the,
the Winbridge Institute, uh, Mark Bacuzzi and Julie Beischel, uh, this philosophy of trying to
normalize, optimize, and utilize psi functioning.
And this is, I kind of take to heart as kind of a guiding philosophy, uh, and, and how I want to
apply my work in this field.
So, uh, we've spent a lot of time, uh, really fighting kind of like orthodoxy scientific
establishment.
And just to say that, like, yes, this is a real phenomenon.
Um, and maybe even asking questions about what is psi.
Um, I think it's time though, that, you know, at least for me personally, it's more moving
towards like the why of psi.
What does this mean and how can we use it and apply it?
Um, and so most of my work is kind of like centered around this intersection between,
uh, more basic and applied research.
And so I'll just briefly touch on a couple of the projects that I have ongoing.
Um, and, and how I think this all kinds of, kind of connects.
So first of all, uh, I've been involved in a project called entangled, which I won't go
and do too much depth because my colleague, Adam Curry is on the call and he will be
talking about this more deeply, but, uh, just in short strip entangled is, um, is a quantum,
uh, random event generator on a server.
Um, and we've, we've created an app user interface for this, wherein, uh, we can assign a bit stream of
random data to, uh, all of the users on our network and we can explore for interesting patterns in
that data, such as, uh, deviations, um, from randomness within user and like individual users
that might be correlated with like subjective events.
Um, you know, people report, uh, some of our users have reported like being in deep meditation and
getting a notification that their, their, uh, data has strayed away from randomness, but we can also
kind of roll that up into regional effects, looking at patterns and trends, um, through like a city and,
uh, like local regional areas as well as the globe.
And really to me, what entangled is, is, is essentially a platform for, um, hosting any other
variety of types of experiments that can sit on top of that.
And, and Adam will speak a little bit more to this.
Um, one of our, of course, our, uh, deeply, uh, inspired, um, uh, precedent for this.
You can look at the work of the pair lab.
You can look at the global consciousness project to get a little bit more, um, framework.
And I, I put the, uh, the QR code so you can, uh, take a look at the app and see as well,
um, some of the guiding philosophy behind that.
So this is kind of like couched under the idea of normalization.
So what platforms like entangled do is really give users a, uh, um, a way of kind of connecting
with topics related to Psy and connecting it with their own personal experiences,
which I think is really interesting.
Uh, next I want to talk about some of the work I do is really around establishing tools.
Um, and so this would kind of go under the category of optimizing for Psy.
So, uh, Cedric, unfortunately he was not, uh, able to make it today.
Uh, one of my colleagues, I've also been working with Julia Mossbridge and, and Helena Wabe from IONS
and, uh, from the Institute of Love and Time.
And we've been creating and curating a large, uh, image database that can be used as stimuli for
various psychological and parapsychological experiments, including remote viewing.
Within this data set, we have tracked 18 different subjective classes of, uh, basically
like psychological classes, things like, um, numinosity or emotional valence, abstractness,
et cetera.
And, uh, what this allows us to do then is to correlate the subjective criteria to any number
of things like the probability of one of these targets being a hit within a remote viewing experiment,
for example.
So this is a way for researchers to essentially curate their data sets for their experiments,
including remote viewing experiments, to try to like balance their stimuli.
We can allow researchers to essentially select semantically orthogonal images that are also
matched for visual similarity.
So we can control for possible count confounds, et cetera.
There's a lot to this project that I can't fully unpack here, but again, there's a QR code.
We can read a little bit more about it, but this will be an open source tool.
There's a tool set, um, you know, that will be available for the field more broadly.
And I use this as kind of a foundation to, to run, um, many other, uh, uh, investigations
and experiments as well.
And I'll talk a little quickly about that as well.
So the big area that I've been working in to try to, again, uh, work on optimization,
leveraging the same kind of database.
I've been working in AI methods and in particularly using AI
as a way to automate the judging process in a remote viewing task.
And what this allows us to do is essentially to compare a user's or user or participants
transcript.
If you're a viewer, um, you get into some kind of meditative state and you're trying to tap into some
non-local information, apprehending a target from a distance.
Um, you know, hopefully most of the people in the car are somewhat at least vaguely familiar with remote
viewing. Um, you might produce a transcript, which is like a drawing and some, uh, text, uh,
pertaining to that target.
And in this scenario, we can actually automate the, uh, judging process, which is essentially
comparing the semantic information that was produced in the transcript, as well as the
visual information from the drawing directly to the target and evaluate how similar these two things
are. And, uh, this is a fully automated process. And so this has a lot of distinct advantages over
the typical human judging methods, because it's a lot faster. Uh, it allows us to avoid bottlenecks,
whereas like a human judge can only look at, uh, maybe three or four decoy comparisons,
whereas we can essentially, uh, compare the target to thousands of potential targets simultaneously.
And it also removes a lot of, uh, bias on the part of the judge, um, you know, state factors,
such as their mood, and if they're hungry or not, when they're looking at these images,
uh, order effects, what, what order or sequence they see the targets in, uh, as well as even the
environment they're in when they're making the evaluation, uh, not to mention the judge's own
sigh that can get wrapped up into the judging process. Um, so I do want to acknowledge that this work
was funded by the IRVA research grant. Um, and so this, uh, this has been moving forward quite nicely.
Uh, Julia Mossbridge and I have a paper, uh, in prep actually in, uh, review right now that's looking
this process within a, uh, pre-cognitive lucid dreaming paradigm. And, and we found some really,
really interesting results when the automated judging was outperforming human judges, um,
quite substantially. And so we're, we're further testing this out. Uh,
the final category I'll mention is, uh, automated viewing. So this is an exploration to see whether
we can, um, witness sigh essentially within an AI system. And, uh, so essentially what this is
about, and this is also was funded by this IRVA grant, uh, we've got a, a method to produce
transcripts from AI using, um, a couple of different methods, uh, but basically leveraging
random event generators or regs to drive large language models to produce, uh, text transcripts,
as well as to generate images. And then we can compare those images that were generated to the
selected target. Um, at, at the top there, you can see an image of just like a completely,
you're kind of like feeding in random data to generate an image. And it kind of has this
weird, uh, weird form. It maybe looks like a couple of people walking on the beach, uh,
on the bottom, you'll see, uh, another example. And this is what within the experiment that I actually
tested this in which we, um, on the right, you can see an AI generated image. And on the left,
you can see a target and there are several points of correspondence where like the geodesic form of the
domes, you can see, uh, skyscrapers in the background and building cranes. And this is an
example of a really strong hit. Um, I, I won't be able to go into the full results of this study,
but it is very, very interesting and something that we are now looking at, uh, porting over to
the entangled app where we can essentially use the bit stream data, random data created by users on the
app to generate these images and then test them against targets to kind of, as a kind of a full
loop, uh, feedback of side functioning within this kind of, uh, collective consciousness. Um, so, uh,
just to wrap up, um, uh, there's, there's a lot that I could talk about as, as far as, uh, various, uh,
research interests, et cetera. But I think what I think is really important for the field to move
forward is like, can we, um, create, uh, tools and techniques to increase the probability of people
having their own experiences and then provide frameworks from which people can interpret these
and really start to drive, like, what is the, the ultimately, what is the meaning, uh, getting beyond
just like, does this happen to like, what does this mean in terms of consciousness, in terms of reality,
in terms of like our purpose for being here in the, in, in this 3D, uh, experience. So, um, from there,
I think I'm, I'm out of time. So I'll, I'll, uh, I'll leave it. Thank you so much. And I appreciate
the opportunity to, to, to quickly talk about my stuff. Uh, if you want to get in touch with me,
there's my, uh, LinkedIn QR code, and here's my AI generated profile with no fingers. So we do
see some limitations on these really cool tools that we get to use these days. So I'll stop sharing.
Okay. All right. Thank you very much, Damon. Wonderful, truly. And you are perfectly on time
and there's a lot more to be said, but now this is, as I was saying, like a tasting for all of
those who want to know more. And as I was also mentioning at the beginning, I, I understand that
for some of you in the audience, it won't be immediately clear what AI or RV means, or even
what remote viewing means, or what the protocols or the scoring or precognition or lucid dreaming or
random event generators. So Google it or type it in the chat. Let people help you just get those
basics. If you've never heard of them, it's better than you go to Wikipedia and you read what the
guerrilla skeptics write, which is, which is often bullshit. So this is your opportunity to kind of learn
about those things for the first time through the actual people who are working on them and who know
about them. So please use the chat. Thank you so much, Damon, again. All right. Now I'm gonna find
Marina Wehler. Give me a second.
Here you are. Okay.
Give me a second, Marina, and then I'll remove. You see.
Fantastic. Marina Wehler, it's good to have you back. All yours.
Thanks, Alex, for the invitation to participate in this meeting.
I think it's very important that we are talking about PSI and how the research on PSI is going.
So I'm very happy to be here. Okay. Can you still see me? I just removed me from the spotlight. Okay.
I didn't prepare any slides, so I'm gonna just share a little bit what we've been doing,
especially like how I've been studying PSI in my research.
So I'm an assistant professor at the Division of Perceptual Studies, University of Virginia.
For who is not familiar with the division, it was it was founded by 1967 by Ian Stevenson, and he
started studying the cases of reincarnation type. And we have evolved since 1967 to studying near-death
experiences, mediumship, remote viewing, out-of-body experiences, and also other types of phenomena.
Everything that defies physicalism and the idea that consciousness is tied to brain processes.
And I have two other colleagues here with me, Edward Kelly and David Acunzon. They're also going to be
talking a little bit what we are doing in the lab.
So my research at the Division of Perceptual Studies mainly involves out-of-body experiences.
And Alex, thanks for giving a heads up on like that, not everyone knows of the terms that we
are talking about. So out-of-body experiences are those experiences. And the way that I like to define
is those experiences, usually temporary, that people feel they are disembodied. And by disembodied,
I mean, during a specific period of time, they have the feeling that they exist. They are still existing,
but they are not attached to their physical bodies anymore. And with that, they can see their physical
bodies. Sometimes they don't see their physical bodies. People go to different, people experience
many different things during out-of-body experiences. Some people just during the night, wake up during
the sleep and they see themselves floating in the room and look down and see their bodies. They might
get scared. They might think they're dead and instantly get back to their bodies. Other people,
they go to different realms or dimensions and they say they don't stay in the physical
realm and they explore different experiences. Many people have contact with deceased people. Many
people have contact with spirit guides. So it's a very broad phenomenological experience. So it's very
rich and people experience many different things. The phenomenological feature that ties them all
together is the disembodiment feeling, which again can be used to distinguish out-of-body experiences,
for example, from remote viewing or lucid dreaming that doesn't really contain the disembodiment feeling.
So I joined DOBS in July 2023. And since I joined DOBS, I've been doing research with people that can
induce out-of-body experiences because one of the questions that I have is trying to understand what's
happening in the brain during these experiences. But also I want to see if people are able to see and spot a target.
You know, it's a very classic way of testing ESP during out-of-body experiences is to go and put a target in another room
and ask the participant to go and see and bring any type of information or perception.
So in a way, it's similar to remote viewing. But again, if the person has the disembodiment feeling,
then I would be calling this an out-of-body experience instead of a remote viewing.
The first experiments that I conducted with testing participants to bring some type of information
was in July last year, 2024, where I went to Brazil. I've been working with participants that can induce
out-of-body experiences at will. And they have specific techniques. They use meditation, visualization,
like focus, and some of them take many years or many decades to even be able to induce these experiences.
But I've been working with this institute and they were able to find me the best OB-ers in terms of
people that can induce such experiences in a controlled environment. Let's say right now, you need to
induce these experiences because I was doing EEG and you go and need to see a target which is in another room.
So I selected 21 participants. And in July last year, I went to Brazil. David, my colleague, he joined me.
And one of the tasks was when the participant was using the EEG and inducing the OB was to go and go to
another room and see a target that we put that was randomly chosen by the computer out of a pool from 100
objects that were pre-selected. And the monitor was displaying the object and the monitor of the
computer was facing the wall. So none of the researchers knew what was going to be displaced there.
We were completely blind to the to the results until last week when I analyzed the data.
So like OB-ers and everyone was asking me, how did it go? What targets were generated? So we we were 100% blind,
blind to the target. And as soon as the experiments were done, we would just go and press ask without even
seeing what target was being generated. So it was one target for each participant. As I said, I had 21 participants.
Out of the 21 participants, nine were able to induce the OB according to their subjective feeling of
disembodiment. But 13 people were able to bring me some kind of information. So as you can see, a little
bit more than OB-ers. And those people that didn't have the OB- but still were able to bring some kind of
information. They said they saw that information, they perceived that perception in their mental
screens. So they didn't actually say, oh, I went there and I saw. It was more like I just had the
information in my mental screen. And the descriptions that they brought were generally compared to remote
viewing for those who are familiar to remote viewing and researching remote viewing. They were generally
very simplistic. So they were giving me information such as I see the color red, maybe a flower red,
maybe a rose. Or another participant told me it's something related to the beach. Another participant
told me I kind of saw a fish, blueish fish, red.
So the participants were very focused on actually seeing the target instead of bringing just perceptions
that could be tied to the target like it's done in remote viewing. So then last week, I finally opened
the results that were generated for the target and by using a script that grouped the 100 objects into 20
groups, five objects per group according to shape, color and semantic information, very different from
each other. So each one of these groups contained objects that were very different from each other. I gave
all of these objects containing in one group along with the description to an independent judge to rate
the how the participant went in terms of hit or miss for the target. And as I said, we had 13 impressions
and what in terms of results, none of the participants actually was able to see the target or not only to
not see the target, but none of the participants had a the target as being the first object with 100% accuracy
determined by the independent judge. And that to me is very is very striking. And, you know, I was caught
off guard. To be honest, I wasn't expecting to like have 13 participants that were highly trained and have
a lot of experience in inducing obese and many of them had veridical perceptions according to them that
legit legitimized their experiences. But then when I saw my results, I was like, okay, no one got a hit in
terms of the of the judging. And that made me think and real reanalyze the entire way we've been evaluating
ESP in out of body experiences. And I've been talking to many experiences and trying to understand
why is it
Why is it hard to make OBEs spot a target and
And try to replicate some results. You know, we did have some results, like we can see in the
literature. For example, Missy is studied by Charles Starr in 1967. She was able to spot the five digit
number that was placed above the shelf. And she was able to see and bring the information of what digit
was there while she was having the OBE. And also, we do have a very specific evidence for ESP doing
out of body experiences. But in general, I would say 90% of the studies, people are just not able to bring
accurate information during their OBEs. And, and I've been talking to many OBEs, you know, participants,
and they tell me that among the limitations and challenges they have is that it's very hard for
them to choose where they're going to go during their out of body experiences. So, you know, when
they when they have their experiences, sometimes they can go to totally different realms or dimensions,
or sometimes it's really hard for them to stay in the physical road because it might be a different
frequency, it's a low frequency, and they sometimes they're being called to do something else to to
help spirits or people that need help, or they are they just don't choose where to go. So so I've been
thinking, how can we leverage, you know, how can we optimize ESP research during out of body experiences.
And I think one way out of this conundrum could be, for example, to develop a viridicality index
that could be applied to first person reports. So to give an example, during my experiments
that I conducted in Brazil, although none of the participants was able to spot the target that was
generated in the in another room, I had three reports that completely blew up my mind in terms of
people telling to two of the participants told exactly where David, my colleague and I were sitting
during their out of body experiences. So they gave they gave us accurate perceptions on Marina, I saw you
were sitting here and David, you were sitting there and there's no way they could have known where we
were sitting. So two people gave us accurate descriptions. And interestingly, we were sitting in different
positions during both experiences and we switch. So you know, that was very, that was very interesting. And
another participant brought some very personal descriptions of, I would say, my son, during his
interview, you know, he said that during his out of body experience, he visited this, this kid and he
started describing how this boy was. And he gave me very personal information that I was, you know, I was really,
I could not believe everything he was telling me. And, and he never knew I was having those,
those problems with my son, there was no way he could have known that my son had that personality,
and he was facing such and such problems. You know, like all of the information he gave me during
our interview. So what are the way that I would like to see this field, especially ESP during out of body
experiences? How can we, how can we leverage, how can we maximize their impressions, given that it is a
challenge for them to, inside a lab, induce the OB and go to another room and see a target, you know,
maybe, maybe this is too, maybe this is too limiting, maybe this is too, you know, this kind of, I'm thinking
that this kind of methodology is just outdated. And we need to move forward thinking what other ways
can we test ESP during out of body experiences, or there are many, many things that I'm already
considering giving the environment that is good for them. So I've already learned that it's not an
experience that is easy to induce, they need the optimal environment, they need to be in the right
state of mind, they need to be with the right psychological features, a good relationship
with the research team. So there are many aspects and variables that are already, that need to be
taken into account for a person to induce an OB. And then we add another challenge, which is here in
the physical road, I'm using their words, go to their room and spot a target. And according to them,
they have very little control to where they're going, and bringing such information. So yeah,
just to finalize, I think I've completed my 15 minutes. This is where I would like to see the
field going like us evolving in terms of analyzing ESP during out of body experiences. I'm open to
feedback, I'm open to ideas, I'm open to collaborations, but this is where I'm moving next.
Wonderful Marina. Thank you so much. And especially thank you for the vulnerability in showing us
what things you've been trying and there have been no results. So this makes more credible the
so-called impossible we're trying to study and sharing it and also not offering the usual super
polish, super strong, super certain results that we may find, but saying, look, this is an art we need
to optimize, we need to improve. And yeah, we have these unpolished struggles going on. How can we do
better? And also thank you for bringing in the talented people who have a lot of skills
and the very important interaction between we as researchers and the rest of human beings who
can do these things, but we just need to learn how to do these new signs where
when we invite them to the lab, they don't feel like Francis Bacon would say when he recommended that
we should interrogate nature until she spits her secrets. That's really another kind of sign we're
trying to do here. Thank you, Marina. Thank you, Alex. All right. Next one. If you're there, Mario Varvoglis,
I'll spotlight you. Let's see.
Hello, Alex. Oh, you're here. Yeah. Wonderful. Give me a second.
Here you are. Thank you so much for accepting this invitation. And the floor is yours.
Thank you, Alex. And greetings, everybody. Hi. I know there are some familiar faces.
Hope there you'll stay to the end of this late evening. It's evening here and right here in France.
Um, so yeah, Alex, I'm going to share my screen if that's okay.
Of course, your co-host, you should be able to do it. I think you're pressing on your laptop and
the camera is moving back and forth as if you are driving, but that won't be a problem the
moment you've shared your screen. Yeah. I drive pretty, I'm pretty wild when I drive. So it's okay.
So this is the organization that I work with. I've been with the, so we're in France,
the Institute Metapsychic International has been around for just over a century since 1919.
And it's a public interest research foundation recognized by the state, which is kind of an
anomaly in France because it's probably the only institution that's officially recognized doing
parapsychology. Um, but we have had good fortune to maintain this foundation alive in the, uh, as the
French say, in the paid that they got in the world of in this, at the core of Cartesian reasoning.
Um, so let me just give you a quick, uh, overview of what the Institute is about and in, you know, historically.
Uh, and then I'll tell you a little bit about myself. So
these are two of the heroes. There are many that started the Institute. It started in 1919.
Charles Richer is a Nobel prize for medicine and, uh, Gustav Gillet is also, was also a doctor
and they launched the Institute along with some others, uh, in a kind of, with a desire, a little
bit like the society for psycho research with a desire to look closely at the claims of
spiritism or spiritualism in English, and to try and examine them scientifically independently of,
let's say the belief system, see if there's a foundation that's can be neutrally objectively studied.
And, um, so one of the highest points of the Institute was the very beginning when, uh,
uh, Richard and a few others. Uh, so this was the building. They were well-financed. They had a whole
building at first. That was a kind of exceptional. Um, their first, very first big study was with, uh,
a Polish medium named Franek Kluski, who was already known in some circles as being a serious
physical medium, meaning serious. He was very low key, very modest. Uh, he was kind of like a war hero
in Poland also, and a writer, educated man, absolutely no desire for being known, uh, you know, any,
no, no desire for any kind of, let's say, uh, um, notoriety and so forth. And he was studied
most thoroughly at the Institute of Metapsychic. Uh, and they, there were some very astonishing
sessions with hand molds, uh, not just hand, there were other parts of the body. There were some feet
and some, um, uh, a jaw. Now what, I mean, this is, this is not the focus on my talk, so it's going to
take a long time, but it's basically, it was a study of the possibility that some mediums claimed
to produce ectoplasm is kind of form that seems to emanate from the body or just appears, uh, by
itself. And slowly this vaporous form, uh, kind of congeals and becomes like an apparition, like a
ghost, if it's visible. And other times, even if it stays invisible, it, people feel touches and
breezes and things like that. So of course, all this is the kind of thing that people run away from.
I ran away from it when I first was invited to be take, become president of the Institute.
And that was in 1998. And when I saw that, I was kind of smiling and say, wow,
people were really naive back then in the early 20th century. And in fact, I started studying the
case very closely and there was a lot of documentation on it. And I started really
scratching my head as to how in the world this medium could have produced this fraudulent, uh,
hand molds. So basically he, the, the request was he would go into a trance and everybody around,
of course, was holding hands and feet and everything and all tangled. And as he goes to trance and the
deeper he went to trance, things started happening. And there was, uh, like a, uh, kind of a box with
melted wax. It was constantly maintained in the melted state. And the request was for the apparitions,
the ectoplasm to dip their, let's say ectoplasmic hand into the wax and then to disappear from within
to evaporate, so to speak. And so in this manner, they produced, uh, quite a few molds, which were then
used. You, we put plaster in it and then it became hard. And these hand molds have, I would say that
they're the most astonishing objects of 150 years of psychical research. They're just absolutely
astonishing first on a sociological level, but also because if you really study the, the, the
documentation, you cannot, I cannot, and others have tried, I cannot find a way that this was produced
fraudulently unless several of the researchers involved, at least two, were part of the fraud.
And that means noble prizes. There was, uh, a number of people really well known who were known to
capture, uh, frauds. So anyway, it was a very strong beginning of the instrument of psychique. It was a
shock, culture shock for me because I'm coming from a cognitive psychology, experimental psychology
background. And my original research was in, uh, ESP at Princeton at psychophysical research labs.
But at any rate, it is just to say I'm was used to small, very, uh, civilized phenomena and not these
kind of extreme manifestations. What appears to be extreme manifestations of, uh, psychokinesis.
So another, uh, hero was, um, Dr. Osti, uh, who studied a well-known medium of the time,
Rudi Schneider and mounted at the Institute. They mounted a very sophisticated protocol for the time
to see if the medium was cheating, trying to levitate a small object a few feet away.
And they use a sophisticated protocol because they used like, uh, a curtain made of, uh, infrared, uh,
beams so that if any object trans kind, if any hand or stick or anything went through that,
they would be immediately detected and, uh, a camera would be launched in the
half second or less than half second that follows. And so would capture the culprit. So presumably the
media in just trying to cheat. And in fact, the camera was constantly, it was, it kept going off
plus the alarms. And what we would see is Rudi Schneider. He was calmly stay, you know,
in his place with everybody surrounded by everybody. There was no movement whatsoever on his part,
but the camera would capture, uh, would show that some movement had occurred without any intervention
that could be physically detected. Uh, and this was kind of, uh, interesting because it was technically,
technologically and technically, uh, uh, way ahead of its time. So the Institute had these kinds of, um,
traditions. Another, uh, René Varchulier, he was kind of anticipating remote viewing protocols with, uh,
free form, uh, in other words, instead of guessing cards, because card guessing had started
to become fashionable in, in, at least in the States and England, uh, he
introduced this protocol, which other, one other person has introduced to in the States,
uh, which is using drawings and a viewer, uh, a few feet or meters or kilometers away, trying to capture
that. And I think, I believe that this was kind of inspirational for the program, the Stargate program
that was developed by the DIA, uh, several decades later, which somebody might be talking about.
Um, so there were a lot of individuals who were interested, um, I guess I'm going, this is going
fast time. So, but just to say that the IMI was quite, the Institute of Metapsychic has been quite active
for a century and attracted well-known individuals. What you see here is the astronomer Camille
the, uh, well-known philosopher and psychologist Henri Bergson, Rémy Chauvin, uh, who some of you may
know for doing research in biology and PIC and PSI, and Olivier Costa de Beauregard, a well-known physicist
also. Um, now we're jumping back or forward to when I was around, that's me on the left here, and I'm
sitting next to Charles Onerton, uh, Rick Berger, some of you may know, Steven Browdy. Um, we were part of,
not Steven, but the rest of us were part of the psychophysical research labs at Princeton, which was
best known for its work on the Gonsfeld. So basically Chuck and also one or two others, William Broad and
Adrian Parker, had introduced the Gonsfeld a few years earlier, and it seemed to be very successful.
And the mission when we got to Princeton was to create an automated system that meets all the
criticisms that, uh, skeptics could come up with to try and explain away the results.
And we did create a very, very interesting protocol, um, together, and, uh, this has been published,
and it's a well-known, uh, let's say a very well-known protocol in the field of parapsychology,
because it's one that has been going on for several decades now. It is still producing, uh, quite
respectable results. Um, and for those who would like to know more, there are many people who can present
this. It's very easy to find, but it's basically a protocol where you're put into a slightly altered
state with, uh, ping pong balls over the eyes and the headphones over the ears, so that you can go
into what's called a quasi-hypnagogic state. And from there, you free associate while there's a sender
in another room attempting to send a randomly selected image. And then at the end, when you
come out of the state, um, you're supposed to select which of four possibilities
was the image on your TV screen. So all this was automated, and it was a big, big step forward for
parapsychology. And, uh, what is less known about this lab, one of the, definitely one of the leading
labs at the time, is that we also were interested in testing, automated testing systems that people can
practically do at home. People can do on their own and disguised as games. And that kind of intrigued
me. So when I moved to France, I kind of followed up on this and I started creating tests that could
be used, uh, independently by people and data collected. And that ended up leading to, uh, a CD-ROM
that I collected that was both educational and had a number of, uh, side tests involved. So this became
pretty well known in France and the States, in Greece, because I'm part Greek. Um, and that kind of led
some people at the Institute Metapsychique to, it motivated them to invite me to become the president
of the Institute at the time. So this is our team. Uh, the Institute basically has two major activities.
One is, uh, geared towards research. So I'll be talking a little bit about that. And the other
is geared towards helping raise awareness in France and in Europe in general about
PSI research, uh, attracting students, attracting researchers, giving good, reliable information,
uh, organizing conventions and conferences and so forth. So I'm kind of proud that some of the
people that are here, perhaps, I think David is here, came through the Institute through something
that we had organized. We had organized the group specifically for students, doctoral students
and master students. Uh, some of you may recognize Renault, who's PA president a couple of years ago,
Thomas Rabbeon, who's excellent researcher in clinical parapsychology. David is here. He's, he'll be
speaking today. So we're happy that that also we're, because we're very concerned about how the field can
renew itself, at least in France. Um, so what's going on today? That's Peter Bansel. I don't know if he's here
today, but together we created a series of experiments that started as telepathy experiments,
then it became precognition. And now it's PSI at home, meaning experience that literally people can
run completely from their place. Uh, and, uh, they, uh, and, uh, Peter is particularly interested in
different cohorts, uh, like comparing meditation cohorts versus people who claim, have claims for psychic
powers versus anybody else. And, um, the way it works is that there's a interesting star field that
shows up. And if you click on the right button, you get an impressive image that comes through.
That's always different images. And if not, you have a miss. And so we're testing if people can feel
which of random stars are hiding an interesting image. And this is kind of, uh, uh, an ongoing
research project that we have with different cohorts. Uh, another thing that attracted us is
PK, micro PK at first. Um, ah, this time, how much time do I have Alex? Don't worry, go ahead. This is
fascinating. Okay. So in France, there was, uh, uh, a doctor and, uh, medical doctor, very interesting,
who following the steps of Remy Chauvin, this, uh, decided to use the, this robot here that had a
random number generator built in. Now this had been, it does like a random walk and people try to
influence it and make it come towards you or move away for you and so forth and see if you can influence
the random number generator. So the robot moves by your will. But the, the genius of this test of René Perocq,
who was part of the IMME for a while, was to associate it with chicks and to, to see, to first, uh, you know,
the priming instinct, uh, this is what chicks and other will follow the first, uh, living entity,
so to speak, uh, their mother generally. But if it's not their mother, they might follow a human being,
the first entity that is moving in their visual field and they tend to attach to it. And so René Perocq
created this, um, this attachment to this robot when they were very young. And then a little later,
he would either let the robot randomly, the robot would stroll either within the visual field of the
chicks or it would move away, wouldn't be out of the visual field while the chicks were enclosed in a
cage. So I don't know if this would get by, uh, ethical committees today, but, um, basically
he had really exceptional results with a ticoscope, which kept on coming into the visual range of the
chicks, kept on approaching them, which strongly suggests, at least at the first interpretation,
that the chicks were influencing the random number generator to keep, even though they had no idea
how to do this, no con, no, no conscious volition, uh, but to keep it within visual range. So this was a
very interesting experiment. And we've been, uh, going on into macro-pique because pique suddenly has
become, uh, a real issue for us. We would like to look further, um, with Eric Doulin, who is up here,
he's also closely associated with IMI. We've been, uh, exploring, uh, uh, macro-pique subject
in Greece, who is a martial arts master, and he seems to produce really astonishing results.
Uh, here we're positioned in his own space, um, but there is a wide variety of phenomena that he
produces. One of the most striking of which is putting out count, putting out candles at several
meters distance. And we've filmed this several times at his lab. And we've had, I've had one, uh,
occasion, which was not a controlled experiment, but it was filmed where he seems that he put out
the candle at the Institute of Metapsychique from several thousand kilometers away, uh, while he was
focusing on it via, uh, Zoom. So he was focusing on it via Zoom and he put out the candle. So right
now we're extremely interested. We're setting up a protocol so that now it's much better control
with double cameras and all that so that he can attempt to put out candles or to make these little
pyramids like this rotate at a few thousand kilometers distance. And he's quite confident he can do it.
And after I saw that candle go out, I'm pretty hopeful that he'll do that too.
So, uh, yeah, and I'll just finish with this. Uh, this is, uh, sorry, almost finished. This is just
to show that the observations that especially Eric has done are showing that there is no decline effect
with these kinds of experiments of macro-PK with very well, very, um, uh, talented, uh, let's say,
participants. Uh, and there's even the inverse. There's sometimes some learning effects observed.
They get better over time rather than what some parapsychologists think, which is that effects
decline. Okay. And I'll just close with one item, which is that we're going to be doing, uh, this year
with, uh, two very well known experts and creativity. I'm also in the creativity, uh, innovation, uh, expert.
That's my work. Uh, my pain paid work. And we're working with two individuals here that are professors
at the university of Paris. And we're going to be mounting, uh, an experiment that's looking at the
interface of creativity, creative thinking, uh, virtual reality, and parapsychology,
psi phenomena to see whether we can use virtual reality and enhance, uh, creative thinking within
the virtual environments and finding if that's going to impact positively, um, individuals' psi capacities.
So that's it. And you can contact me via the Institute of Metapsychic. Uh, my name is Mario,
and I'll be happy to have further discussions with you.
Thank you very much, Mario. What a wonderful presentation. We've had a bit of everything,
a bit of history of your own and of the field, the sociology, the skeptics. We, we used to call
them the skeptics, but we're also skeptics. They shouldn't appropriate the word actually.
We call them pseudo-sceptics here in France.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. The technology of the time, the current technologies of today,
we've seen before something about AI, now virtual reality. I also enjoyed seeing the names of other
researchers so that these names start being more familiar to wider audiences. There was so much
psi in animals, which is a very... Sorry, I, I, I kind of took a historical... I'm just congratulating
on that. Why not? I mean, it's a not so, so explored route, probably very, very fruitful. The public
awareness, the training, and, and also fraud. And yes, there is fraud, but is fraud all there is. And
so very complete, very comprehensive. Thank you so much, Mario. Thank you, Alex, for inviting me.
All right. So next we have David Acunzo. I think you're here. I will spotlight you.
I am here. All right.
All right. And I have slides. All yours, David. Thank you for being here with us tonight.
Well, thanks for having me. Let me just share my screen. Can you, just a second, share?
Can you see my screen? Coming. Yes.
Good. All right. Yeah. So thank you, Alex, for having me. Thank you, everyone, for being here.
It was nice to see you, Mario. It's been, I don't know, 15 years, something like that.
So I'm going to talk about neuroimaging studies of ESP. So I'm David. I'm David Acunzo. I'm going to
introduce myself first. I'm a part of DOPS, the Division of Perceptual Studies. So Marina, who talked
earlier, is my colleague. So I'm not going to spend time to go with DOPS very much. We are part of the
Department of Psychiatry. And this work that I'm going to present is a collaborative work with Marina and
Ed. But the talk, so they may not agree with everything I'm going to say. So it's, yeah, just,
but it is a collaborative work. So I'm an assistant professor here at DOPS. I'm a neuroscientist by
training, cognitive neuroscientist. I've been doing very mainstream stuff. Although I did,
I did do a bit of a parapsychology before, but I've been working on attention and perception,
visual perception, working on the semantic system as well. And I got hired about a year ago at DOPS and
my mission, let's say, to do neuroscience and science research in outer states. But so I had
some familiarity with the field, but it was not really my main, I wouldn't have, I wouldn't say
I'm an expert, right? So the first thing that I wanted to do, and that fits very well with the
purpose of that series of presentations, is what has been done. I wanted to know the field, right? So I
looked at all the papers that there were, that's used this kind of technique. So when I say neuroimaging,
by the way, for those who don't know, it's any technique that measures brain activity,
invasively or non-invasively. So you can, brain activity and the brain in general, because it could,
it could also be the structure of the brain. So EEG, electron cephalography, the picture here,
is one technique. You've got fMRI, you know, when you see those blobs on, on pictures of brains,
so this is also neuroimaging. So the first thing, the first thing I wanted to do was to start,
to start a literature review and assess it, so that, and look at what, what had been done,
so that I could, I could choose or decide what, what should be done in the future. So I'm going to
talk about that today. So first I'd like to ask a question, why, why do you use neuroimaging? So there
are a few arguments for that first, I mean, by perception is a subjective experience,
or it's a behavior as well. So it's linked with brain activity, probably. So it makes sense to
study the brain at the same time. But from a more practical point of view,
you, if you, so if you do an experiment, a site experiment, and you have an ESP effect,
it's going to be a statistical deviation. And it's kind of, it's by itself, by definition,
you've isolated everything from it. So what people have been trying to do is to link it with other
things. So you try to look for correlations with individual differences. Are people who are more
creative, do they manage better? Or you try to change some parameters of the experiments.
So if you manage to correlate your ESP results with a neurophysiological measure,
that would make your results much more robust and credible, right? So that's one first argument.
Second argument would be, if you have, if you can identify such signatures associated with ESP,
then maybe you can start having an idea of what's going on, right? So, so you can start having a
biological or cognitive model of size of ESP. And then the third, a third argument would be that,
if you know, if you've identified a such, your signature, then when you do an experiment,
you can look for these specific signatures. So that's, that there would be indicative of size,
right? If you know that a certain signature is associated with size, then you can look for it,
and you can increase your noise, your signal to noise ratio.
So I conducted a system, what's called a systematic review. So you look at the literature,
but following very specific methods, you report all your methods. And what I, what we come up with is
a, basically a corpus of 100, uh, studies and, um, there, and then we structured them into different
groups. We, we classified them, let's say, and you have basically two broad groups. The first group is
overt ESP paradigms. Um, in these experiments, it's, it's like the ESP experiments, you know, mostly, um,
you're guessing tasks, uh, remote viewing tasks. You ask the participant to perform an ESP task,
and they give you a response, and then you judge the response, right? So we've got a Zennec card test,
for instance. And then at the same time, you record brain activity. The overwhelming method,
uh, the, most of them, the, the, the main method that has been used, um, uh, throughout, I'll show,
I'll show aggregated data, but, um, is EEG because it's cheaper. That's, that was the easiest.
Um, so EEG is the main method that has been used in the, in, uh, in parapsychology. Um, but so while
people perform the task, um, brain activity is recorded. You do a series of trials into a run,
you get a hit rate, and then you try to correlate a measure within your signal with the hit rate.
And this is a subcategory of overt ESP paradigms that I called, uh, task-related activity, because you
look at background activity. And then there's another type or subtype is, uh, event-related
activity. That's mostly, that was mostly contributed by, um, the group in the 90s in particular, um,
Norman Dawn, um, McDonough and Warren. Um, the mainly, the three authors, they were always switching,
uh, places in the papers. They have tons of papers using this type of method. So they showed several,
um, images. One of them is the target, because, because the, it appears later during the feedback
and they look at the neural activities that, that is generated by the targets. And then the
hypothesis is that the, the, the targets, uh, would generate a different neural activity than the
decoys, right? So it's just a different method. Uh, very different method. It's the whole, the,
the whole approach is very different. It looks similar, but it's very different.
Um, the other broad category of, uh, ESP paradigms, uh, using neuroimaging is, uh,
looking at implicit ESP. So instead of asking participants to perform an overtask,
a guessing task or remote viewing task, for instance, the, the, the participant is not doing
anything, but you record your brain, the brain activity, and you, uh, look for anomalies within the,
the brain signal and the anomaly is inferred to be ESP. So there are two main paradigms that people
have used. Of course, there's some variations, but broadly, um, especially distance stimulation.
So typically you'd have two people, one, uh, two people in two different rooms, separated rooms.
One is being stimulated. Let's say they're shown, shown flashes. Um, and the other person is not
stimulated, but is, uh, is hooked to the EEG. And you look at whether the stimulation of the,
of participant one, um, um, generates a change in your activity in participant two.
That's the paradigm. And then if it does, then you say, okay, there's, there's a change in brain
activity in participant two. And that, that would be ESP. And the other big, um, big paradigm is, uh,
uh, the prison human paradigm or more, more recently has been called the PAA predictive
anticipatory activity. So you show pictures to, to, uh, to the person, to the participants,
uh, or any other kind of stimulus. And the hypothesis is that the brain will, um, anticipate
the stimulation. So in this example, you show emotional, emotional stimulus, uh, and you infer that
the brain will know in advance that it's an emotional stimulus. The, the signal in that
pre-stimulus period will look different than if it's a neutral stimulus, right? So those are the main,
the four main categories that's, uh, that we found. Um, so this is the aggregated data from the
publication. So you can see if it comes, it started in 1952 till, till today. Interestingly, it's kind of
flat. So you can see that, uh, despite neuroscience being, having boomed, uh, in the eighties and nineties,
nineties in particular, um, it hasn't really changed that much in parapsychology. Um, and what else can
I say? Uh, it's about 60% of explicit, 40% of, uh, implicit ESP studies, a third of them, especially
distant stimulation. Um, the, uh, uh, uh, task, uh, um, task-driven activity. The very first, uh, sub
example I showed is, is kind of, uh, older paradigm, uh, and the events related replaced it because it's
more, more in line. It was more, more of a modern, uh, using computation, uh, competition,
computational tools. Uh, you can do it in ERP studies, event related studies.
Uh, and you can see OB studies were quite early as well. And there's a gap. And then now Marina
in particular is reviving that. Um, so yeah, that gives you another view PAA, uh, very small,
very small contribution, uh, in numbers. It's a very popular paradigm, but people haven't used it
for neuroscience using your science methods very much. They used heartbeat or, uh, skin conductance,
other pupil dilation, but not so much, um, not so much EEG or neuroimaging.
Okay. So, uh, very briefly, I don't know how much time I have, but very briefly, um, what can we,
what do the study, uh, show? I'm not going to go into details a lot, um, or not at all, actually. Um,
but, um, so there were 58 studies of oversight studies with, uh, with neuroscience. Um, and actually
most of them did not, either did not have, uh, behavioral results, uh, significant behavioral
results, or they did not report the results. And there were only, I think, eight studies that had, uh,
significant, uh, significant results, statistically significant. Um, and, uh, what can I say? Uh,
the free response studies overall, they're not of very good quality. They quite, they're usually
pilot studies. So free response studies, like, uh, against cell studies, neuroduring studies,
they're quite hard to, they're quite heavy studies to do already by themselves. When you add EEG on top of
that or any of the neuroimaging methods, it's, it's an added, an added complication. It's an added
difficulty, right? So it's no wonder that actually there's few studies and also the quality is not
that good because people just do a few, a few participants or one participant, a few trials,
and then it's too much. They don't have funding or so, so that's something to keep in mind. Um,
some studies, so a lot of these studies, not all, but a lot of these studies actually have
selected participants, uh, gifted participants, uh, Morris and Al, um, in particular, Warren Dawn,
this is, this is, um, also, um, also a selected participant. Those are select the median participants
and, uh, you can see the results also quite varied, right? So alpha pops up, um, for different reasons,
for theoretical, but also practical reasons. I'm not going to go into detail, but, um, so once this
study found a negative correlation, the study found a positive correlation, so it's, it's hard to, um,
to, to aggregate this data, right? And this is a very different method, um, the event related,
so you cannot really compare what's going on. Um, in terms of implicit ESP paradigm, so I'm not going to
go into detail at all, but what I want to say is often they're quite a good quality. They're simpler,
they, they're kind of simpler to, to set up because they can be automatized. There's no,
uh, like in free response ESP study, there's no judging involved. You can, you can basically put
the two participants there, you give them automated instructions, you can automatize almost everything.
So the, the, the, the study themselves, they're usually well conducted, uh, the analysis are usually
good. Um, and, um, actually a lot of them reports results that are consistent with the ESP hypothesis.
So you could say, okay, this is a better paradigm to, um, to study ESPs and then those, uh, those
other TSP studies. Yes. But, um, when you look at the aggregates, um, I am a bit worried, um, because
I look at the methods and I see that every study is using very different methods. So they may use
different baseline. Uh, so one study will use, uh, I don't know, six segments, uh, one second baseline,
another one, 200 milliseconds. Another one will not use a baseline. Another one will use one data
point as a baseline. Some people, some, uh, studies would use the whole window as a baseline. Um, um,
the results will be very, really highly varied as well. So overall, it's a bit worrying in the fact that,
um, there's, there's little consistency between studies, which may indicate some kind of bias
in the way the results are reported or explored the, the methods and the, the, the, the data is
explored. Uh, it could be, I'm not saying it is the case, but it could be indicative of
some cherry picking or bias. And I'm not saying that it's necessarily, uh, done, uh, consciously,
um, when, uh, researchers look for something and they find it, they're happy. So they're like,
okay, that's the, that's, that, that must be the right way. Or, so it's, it's very easy because EEG
or neuroscience data is very complex than 10,000 ways of work to analyze it and to look for effects. So,
um, um, so it's, uh, it's, it's difficult. Okay. So we have, um, recommendations in the,
so we, it's a paper we almost, uh, finished, uh, writing it. Um, so you will see the, uh,
the whole, the whole thing soon, uh, hopefully soon. Um, so we have a list of 15 recommendations
for future research. Um, but, uh, here's a few, um, broad ones. Um, and the first one,
I know that maybe not everyone would agree with that by the co-authors, but I'm gonna say it. So I
would, I would not personally concentrate my efforts on implicit ESP studies because I'm,
I would be much more confident working with an, with an overt ESP, um, measure, a measure of ESP
that is simple, simple. So a hit score or, um, something you don't, you don't need to look to,
to find this, um, you don't need to, um, let's say it with a hit score is very straightforward to,
to know whether you have ESP or not. Right? So I want a simple way to assess whether ESP occurs
in the, um, in the experiments. And then I want to be able to look for neural correlates.
Um, and, and so if you focus on implicit ESP, you, you need to be very careful in the way you report,
your methods, the way you choose your methods and the way you, you, you, uh, you relate to the other
um, to the rest of the literature, I think. Um, it looks like, uh, it pays off to, to recruit
high-performing participants rather than using convenient samples. So I think, um, we will agree
that efforts should be, uh, put into, into choosing high-performing participants. Um, working in the,
studying the income, um, so neural activity and ESP in conjunction with outer state of consciousness,
is probably very fruitful. Uh, it's been looked at a bit in this literature, not so much,
uh, but it makes sense in particular with, uh, neuroscience measures because, uh, you can also,
so the outer state is a subjective experience, but you can also find another way to objectify it,
to, to have an objective measure through the EEG, through, through other, uh, neuroimaging methods.
So that, uh, that's, that's probably a very fruitful, uh, approach. And also another thing, and that's
been totally neglected, it's been a totally, a total dead angle, uh, in the, in the literature
reviewed, is, uh, maybe this is one study that, that, uh, that looks at that, but, uh, looking at
phenomenology. So I'm, I'm really, um, interested in developing that, and we're working with that, um,
um, adopts, uh, looking at the, the subjective measure, the subjective experience, how, how can
you characterize the subjective experience, but also looking at the behavior, so the ESP score,
let's say, and also the neurophysiological measure, and uses those, using those three, um, um,
those, uh, three columns or three anchors, uh, to, to build, uh, to build our research, uh, program
and projects. And that's everything I have, and I hope I was, uh, on time.
Very good, David. Thank you very much for bringing the neural aspect
of these, and we suspect some of these phenomena go beyond the brain, but we also need to go back
to the brain. And yes, the business of looking for anomalies and correlations,
I think it's at the heart of the efforts we're all trying to do. I also appreciated very much the
neurobehavioral paradigms, and that, you know, I was thinking of my previous research in other
centers when I was doing orthodox neuroscience, and it looks very much like the very robust efforts that
many neuroscience labs around the world do to study mice learning or fruit fly perception with,
you know, with these very precise protocols and paradigms, um, and your literature review.
It's, I think it's gonna be so useful to know about experiment types and quality and consistency.
And I particularly love you brought in phenomenology because ultimately this, if this is about
consciousness, we should ask people for their first person experience and take that seriously too,
in order to make sense of these anomalies. So very rounded. Thank you, David.
Thanks.
All right. We have now three more presenters before the break. The next one is Dani Caputi.
You're very welcome. I'll spotlight you. All right. Give me a second. Okay.
Thank you for being with us, with us tonight. And the floor is yours.
All right. Thank you guys. Um, so, and yes, thank you to Alex for hosting this wonderful event. Uh,
so my name is Dani Caputi. I'm primarily an atmospheric science, uh, scientist, but I do some
sci research on the side. Uh, there's a lot I want to get to in 15 minutes. Let me make sure I'm sharing.
Um, so I'm gonna go relatively fast, but if people have questions, please, please, please put them in
the chat. I will for sure get to them, uh, after my talk. So can we see my slides? Okay. Sound quality.
Good. Yes. Okay. So today I'm going to be talking about scalable PSI and, you know, as we think about
the future of PSI, the future of PSI research, the theme of, you know, this, uh, event today,
my, I tried to think of a way I could frame my question in, in a simple, concise way. And
really the, the question that motivates me, that keeps me up at night is, you know, given that there
is some way to obtain large mind matter interaction effects that can be consistently replicated
without a decline effect in a controlled environment, what would be the most efficient
pathway to finding this protocol, assuming such a way exists. And so I'm going to be talking about
two different approaches to that today. Uh, one of them is, uh, quantum random number generator
engineering and glad some previous speakers talked about random number generators. So I assume people
are pretty familiar with that. Um, and then another is mind atmosphere interactions, uh, which aligns with,
uh, you know, my background as an atmospheric scientist, um, and kind of merging that into PSI.
Now I'm going to be talking about these as if they're completely separate, two completely separate
things. Um, just know that's not entirely the reality, but I can't really get into everything
in a 15 minute talk. So I'm going to start with the random number generator engineering. And so
what you see pictured here, um, is this device that I saw called the etherspheric modulator
at a consciousness hacking event back in 2016. Um, it was invented by Leo Madrid, um, local Bay Area
inventor. And basically what it consists of is these 10 different Sileron mind lamps. So a Sileron mind
lamp for those who don't know, it's a random number generator, um, controlling a lighting output, uh,
in a single color. Um, and basically what he did was put 10 of these in an array. And what he claimed
was, you know, when, uh, normally you would expect it to look something like the top image, everything's
a different color because they're all independent bit streams. But when people come around and meditate,
you would get it to look more like something like the bottom example, uh, where the colors would tend to
sync up. Um, so, you know, that was, uh, you know, a pretty impressive concept. And if you think about it,
it kind of makes sense from a theoretical perspective. You have some kind of pretty lights. Uh, you can also
do this with sound, other AI applications we've experimented with, but I'm going to be focusing on lighting
today. Um, it's controlled by random number generators. And then that, uh, the more attention
there is on it, the more pretty it gets, the more aesthetic value it has. And then that increases,
you know, the mind matter interaction effect sizes, which would thereby increase attention. So
this could at least in theory be this positive feedback loop to drive up the mind matter interaction
effect sizes. So what we did is we deployed a version of that, um, to the 2019 Apparitions Music
Festival in Rosarito, Mexico. And something to know about this festival, it's a relatively small
underground festival. Um, attendance is usually, you know, 500 people or so. It was lower this year
because we had, uh, some local wildfire activity. Um, this was a photo I had to take as I evacuated the
night before. Um, but nonetheless, we had, you know, about 100 people show up and we had some pretty
prominent headliners. Um, Troy Pierce, Alexi Delano, and they'll end up playing an important part in this
story. So the LED panel algorithm, right? So these were the panels we put in front of the stage. And
much like the, um, the cups you saw on the previous slide, um, there's 18 different of these pixels that
are controlled by independent random number generator bit streams. Um, now there's more
than 18 different circles here, but the rest of them are filling, uh, and fading and, you know,
making it a complete image. So what we can do is, you know, to test the hypothesis that this is going
to sync up when more people are looking at it is, uh, vector mourns I, that's a measure of spatial
auto correlation, um, which can be used as a proxy for, you know, um, aesthetic value. So the higher
the value of mourns I, the more, um, aesthetic the display is. And in this particular configuration,
these colors would change every 3.8 seconds or so. Um, and this is the algorithm for data processing,
which I'm not going to go through, but people can review it later or ask me questions.
And this is just a time series of the output we get. So pretty much I would say, um, we were testing
and everything, uh, in the beginning, we ran it in pseudo mode for a little bit. Everything to the
right of this faint red line was the formal experiment. Um, and what the y-axis is plotting,
uh, so this is over three nights of the festival. The y-axis is plotting the odds against chance. So in
other words, one divided by the P value. Uh, so one in 80, one in 100, that's basically just what
this is showing. Um, it's an easier way to kind of see spikes. So when we look at the average
mourns I value and compare that to the distribution we expect for the entire festival here, we do not see
any statistically significant results. Um, these are compare pretty much at chance level what you'd expect.
However, um, we had three, um, predefined events that we were going to look at specifically our
two headliners on stage there and there. And then the middle one was a, um, uh, small group meditation
that we did in front of the, um, in front of the lights right next to the stage. Um, it wasn't a lot
of people that participated, but nonetheless, it was something we predicted would enhance the results.
And these three biggest periods of spikes all coincide with those events. And if you look,
if you compare those mourns I values to the remaining, uh, you get, uh, about a two sigma result.
And in line with this, um, the effect size scales pretty nicely with the number of people that were
present on the stage, uh, not on the stage, on the dance floor rather, but in front of the LED panels.
And notice that the numbers here are pretty small. This only goes up to 50 on the x-axis. So we don't
know what would happen if we scaled this to hundreds or thousands of people. Um, my guess is it would
level off at a certain point. Uh, but we don't know where, you know, assuming this effect holds. And so,
you know, that's an exciting, um, future avenue for this. Okay. So now I'm going to be talking about
mind atmosphere interactions. Um, some other names that goes by weather working, weather influence,
aerokinesis, Gaia PK, things like that. So, uh, basically, you know, why do I care about it?
Is it just because, you know, I think weather is really cool and because I, you know, I'm an
atmospheric scientist? Well, partially, but more specifically, you know, the, the theoretical
approach to this is that the atmosphere is by and large, a chaotic fluid. And some of you might be
familiar with the butterfly effect, which is where a butterfly flapping its will in Brazil might lead to
a tornado in Oklahoma, uh, the following month. Right. And it's effectively true. Right. So, um,
turbulence, uh, turbulent flow is basically chaotic. And so you can see some examples of that
in, um, everyday life, you know, even in your kitchen sink, or if you have, you know, a cigarette
or vape, uh, with a trailing smoke, you can see the transition from laminar smooth flow into
turbulent, uh, chaotic flow over here. And so the theory at least would be if you, you know,
if the, uh, mind matter interaction effect is small, if you can, uh, act on a turbulent fluid,
you might get, uh, a larger effect at a later time. And kind of in line with this, something
I get asked a lot is, well, why not just do this in a lab? Why not just take a tank of a very controlled,
you know, uh, fluid and then do the experiment there. And then only if that works, then
talk about the real atmosphere. Uh, I'm kind of approaching it instead from a naturalistic
standpoint, kind of similar to how Rupert Sheldrake, uh, does his research. And the reason
for that is because, uh, weather working and rainmaking has a very prominent background
throughout many indigenous cultures. And I've put a few books here if anybody is interested in learning
more about that. Um, overall though, the summary is, you know, practices vary. Um, but a common theme
is that action should be harmonious with nature and benefit everybody. So it's not clear that doing
this in a lab would really be aligned with that. And we want to design an experiment to be in, uh,
as aligning with these principles as we can. And so, you know, luckily at the Science of
Consciousness Conference in 2016, I met somebody who, you know, claimed, um, she was good at, uh,
working with, uh, natural disasters, namely improving the outcomes of them. And this was, uh,
2016, the height of the, uh, extreme drought in the West. As you can see on the left image here,
we had an exceptional drought in many parts of California. And the idea was to target
two to three locations affected by the drought and do two 20, 20 minute meditation sessions,
uh, that she would do, um, on a particular day with a little bit of rainfall. Now, you know,
we decided, you know, not to go, you know, not to shoot for the stars and just create rain out of
nothing. So we did, you know, um, I was kind of looking at this day by day and we picked a day where
there was some shower activity going on and the goal was to enhance that. And then, you know,
the targets were selected kind of based on the, um, you know, the weather of that day. So they were
selected that morning. Um, and we ended up picking Visalia and Bakersfield. For those who know anything
about, you know, the topography of California, these are both located within the Central Valley,
the Southern Central Valley, where you have a lot of agriculture around here. Uh, there's a lot of
damage crops from the drought that could use a little bit of water. And so those were the targets
we selected. Now, this is the timeline of the experiment. Um, so some things to note, um,
is the targets were selected that morning, um, at 1845, uh, intention work began on the Bakersfield
target. So that's the Southern target. And then, um, this was just a meditation period, um, where
we were focusing, um, well, she mainly, um, focusing on the Bakersfield and Visalia targets. And then
some feedback was given. And then for session two, I said, mostly focus on Visalia. And then
at the very end, she predicted that, uh, effects will be seen in Visalia within two hours.
So keeping that timeline in mind, looks like I've got about three minutes left. I'm going to just
loop through, uh, the Doppler radar image, uh, of this day. And I assume most people are, have seen
weather image, uh, radar maps on television, things like that. Um, this is basically no different than
that. Um, I put the Visalia target up here. It's this blue dot and then the Bakersfield target down
there. One thing to note, those cities are relatively small. It's not like we're talking
about a huge general area. We're really just talking about where these dots are exactly.
And so you can see there is some shower and thunderstorm activity prior to the start of
the session. And then right about, um, here, this is when, you know, intention work began
on the Bakersfield, the Bakersfield target. And there was already some activity in this area,
some showers. These are pretty heavy showers. And then in the next couple of radar frames,
um, if we advance these, you can see there's a little bit more development in this area. It
develops into kind of a full blown thunderstorm and then, uh, gets organized into this line pushing
north. So I would not call this a direct hit. This was not right on the target. Um,
but it was within the time we predicted and it was nonetheless, uh, pretty interesting to see that.
Another interesting thing we saw is at the Visalia target, you'll notice this is a pretty dry area.
Um, we did have prior to focusing on Visalia, a shower activity just over the target. You know,
could interpret that potentially as a precognitive effect. Um, I would say, you know, again,
this is not a direct hit, but it was interesting nonetheless, um, within, you can see within this
timeframe, you're not really getting a lot of activity in this area. Um, so now advancing forward,
uh, the end of the meditation session was, yeah, right, right about here.
So, uh, yeah, so they, they predicted that, um, the, uh, um, you know, there would be effects seen in
Visalia within, uh, two hours, um, at the Visalia target. I kind of didn't really believe this, uh,
because I was looking at the, you know, the radar and it's like, these storms are going to kind of
just fizzle out. Um, they really depend on instability in the atmosphere, um, and it's
getting dark out. So, you know, these are probably just going to fizzle out. Um, but lo and behold,
as we advance this, I'm going to do this pretty slowly here. We see some activity right over Visalia,
just getting started. And this is within the two hour predicted window.
And then this whole band of showers, this whole band of thunderstorms forms right at this latitude
with a particular enhancement on Visalia. And I definitely did not expect that none of the
high resolution models that are pretty good at predicting convection, uh, predicted that.
And so that was, that was pretty interesting. And then, you know, um, it kind of pushed northward,
that whole line of development. Um, so yeah, so that is my talk. Um, again, put any questions in
the chat. I'll be happy to answer them. Um, I will, uh, link my email as well in the chat. Uh,
thank you, Alex.
Thank you very much. Then you really cool. Really cool. We need a side that's scalable.
That is fun. That it's real world. I love your idea of including the feedback in this beautiful
way and creative way. And then about the second part of the presentation, which also surprised me.
So interesting to bring another aspect of physics, which is fascinating,
but nevertheless doesn't get hurt so much because we all love to hear about quantum stuff,
but what about complex and chaotic systems? So very interesting to see that interaction between
this branch of physics and these activities of the weather. Thank you.
Yeah.
All right. Next, we have Manili Tedakshani.
Alex. Hi, Alex. Um, yeah, thank you. I'm going to share my short, uh, platform.
All yours.
Does it help?
Alex. Yeah. Um, just to check how I should do that.
Exactly.
There's an arrow, uh, uh, inside a green box.
Yeah.
So yeah, the promo, yeah, share, and then you can choose.
Oh, I see.
Window from your computer.
You want to share.
Got. Great.
Yeah.
We see it.
And we hear you.
Perfect.
And let me just do the full screen mode.
Everyone can see this. Okay.
Yes.
Okay. Great.
So my name is Manili Dharakshani.
I am associated with the John Bell Institute and Foundational Questions Institute.
I am a business by practice and I'm based in New York.
And I'd like to tell you about the possibility of enhancing
thigh ability and free response experiments with magnetic and electric brain stimulation techniques.
As we all know, a central goal of parapsychology is to amplify effect sizes and replication rates of
the various paradigms of thigh research because currently average effect sizes in
sigh experiments are on the small magnitude size and replication rates tend not to be much
better than around 20 or 30 percent in terms of the percentage of studies in a certain paradigm or
a meta-analytic database that achieve statistical significance at say like the 0.05 alpha level.
So it would be ideal if we could boost average effect sizes and sigh experiments to
large magnitudes and replication rates to 80 or 100 percent.
And existing proposals for amplifying sigh ability as we know use typically altered states of
consciousness such as the Gansfeld techniques or other or hypnosis or other methods and or selected
participants or people with certain personality traits or backgrounds that are correlated with eye
sigh functioning ability and also special target manipulations like dynamic visual targets.
But something that has not really been considered much or at least not until very recently is the
possibility of using non-invasive stimulation of brain function to amplify sigh.
such as for example the so-called transcranial magnetic stimulation technique and transcranial direct
current stimulation techniques.
So the rationale
to start is that if thigh exists it has to be mediated by brain function and there's a lot of evidence to
support that and if that is the case then it ought to be possible to amplify thigh with TMS and TDCS
because these methods have been used in by neuroscientists and neuropsychologists over the past 20
something years to demonstrate enhancements of cognitive abilities of all kinds ordinary cognitive abilities of all
kinds and they do so by amplifying the neural correlates of certain cognitive abilities and depressing the
aspects of brain function that are negatively correlated with certain cognitive abilities.
So insofar as thigh is mediated by brain function and has neural correlates by amplifying those neural neural
correlates or depressing the neural anti-correlates we ought to be able to enhance thigh functioning.
And in particular promising method or approaches to TMS and TDCS or the methods that seem most relevant
to thigh research in my opinion are those developed by the Australian neuropsychologist Alan Snyder
and Snyder has also proposed a particular hypothesis or explanation of why TMS and TDCS seem to enhance
side functioning which he calls the privileged axis hypothesis and this hypothesis seems to as we will
see align with some leading models of side functioning and this is two photos of Alan Snyder on the left hand
side TMS transcranial magnetic stimulation is being applied to his head with this electromagnet that one
of his assistants is holding and is creating a pulsed magnetic field that's acting on a certain part of his
brain and on the right hand side this dummy has two electrodes on the left and the right side of the temples
and an electric current a direct current is passing through one end to the other through the brain and
so these are the two techniques that in visual depiction that I'm going to discuss in more detail in a moment
so the original study that Snyder did in 2003 found that TMS temporarily induces cognitive abilities
similar to those of autistic savants and non-autistic people and the motivation for doing this experiment in
the first place was the observation that autistic savants seem to have depressed functioning of a certain
part of their brain namely the left anterior temporal lobe which is well depicted in the previous photo these
two sides of the head or the left side of that head and so Snyder suggested that we could mimic
the depressed functioning of the latl in ordinary people by applying a low frequency repetitive
TMS over the left anterior temporal lobe or latl for around a 15 minute interval and when they did this
they found that this imparted a temporary around 45 minutes long lasting virtual lesioning of the latl by
virtual lesioning he means that the neural functioning or neural activity of the latl was
significantly inhibited or significantly reduced for this 45 minute period after the application of the TMS
and in the study his team found that there was significantly enhanced performance in various cognitive tasks
one involving numerosity such as guessing the number of jelly beans in a large jar of jelly beans just by
guessing for you know after a few seconds or a number of cards spread out on a table
also in proofreading errors and various proverbs that would pop up on like on a computer screen in a
in a prescribed way and also enhancement significant enhancement in artistic sketching ability of various
things like horses dogs and other types of objects i don't have of course time to go into all the details
of this study but that's the basic outline of the findings in addition his subjects reported certain altered
states of consciousness such as in the case of subject nr who said he was more quote alert and quote
conscious of detail and that he had been taught how to draw dogs for the first time and he wished he
had been asked to quote write an essay something he previously disliked because when stimulated by the
tms technique he became acutely aware of details in his surroundings
so that's the tms results of uh those are the tms results of snyder's research
in terms of the tdcs or transcranial direct current stimulation uh research
research this is discussed in a 2010 study of snyder and his team where they used cathodal stimulation
of the latl the left anterior temporal lobe and anodal stimulation of the right anterior temporal lobe
the cathodal stimulation of the latl denoted by l minus reduced excitability of the latl or in
other words reduced neural activity while the anodal stimulation of the ratl or r plus enhanced the
neural activity or excitability of the ratl and so his team found in essence that tdcs when jointly applied
to the latl significantly enhanced the accuracy of visual working memory memory in the subjects in his experiments
and his team argues that the findings support the hypothesis that the inhibition of the latl
by tdcs can in their words quote lead to a cognitive style that is less influenced by mental templates
mental templates and that the right anterior temporal lobe or ratl may be associated with
insight or novel meaning close quote so those of you familiar with the remote viewing
paradigm and the problem of analytic overlay therein might be able to see already the possible
relevance of this to that paradigm which i will also discuss in a moment too
but before that um here is snyder's privileged access hypothesis or his explanation in brief of what
it means what it amounts to in a 2009 review article so here he's talking about autistic savants and he
says that owing to some atypical brain function that they have savants have privileged access to raw less
processed information or information in some interim state before it is packaged into holistic labels
this privileged access facilitates a distinct literal cognitive style in which a person
thinks in detail working from the parts to the whole and savants access or read off something
that exists in all of our brains but is normally inaccessible through introspection
now snyder also emphasizes that there is a phenomenon of quote sensory hypersensitivity and enhanced
perception of details that are also a direct consequence of this privileged access ability and savants
and which are produced in artificially produced in non-savants and so the pa hypothesis was what led him to
suggest originally that inhibition of the latl functioning with tms can induce
savant-like privileged access ability and non-autistic people so now how do we connect
the pa hypothesis and all of these findings of snyder's work to models of psi ability
so again those of you familiar with remote viewing are probably familiar with paul smith and their
controlled remote viewing handbook and the manual and the problem of analytic overlay
here paul smith explains the problem um and i will just read highlight the main parts of this
body of text showing the relevance and connection to privileged access
the privileged access hypothesis so as smith says the normal waking consciousness poses certain
problems for remote viewing occasioned largely because of the linear analytical thought processes
which are societally enhanced and ingrained from our earliest stages of cognitive development such
analytical thinking hampers remote viewing by the manufacturer of what is known as analytic overlay or
aol as the signal line surges up across the lineman and into the threshold areas of consciousness
the mind's conscious analytical process feels duty-bound to assign coherence to what at first blush
seems virtually incomprehensible data coming from an unaccustomed source it must in other words make
a logical assessment based on the impressions being received and in the next blue highlight instead of
allowing holistic quote right brain processes through which the signal line apparently manifests itself
to assemble a complete and accurate concept untrained left brain based analytic processes
sees upon whatever bits of information seems most familiar and forms an aol construct based on it
so one can i think see now fairly straightforwardly how say a method like tms or tdcs insofar as it's
inhibiting functioning of the left anterior temporal lobe and perhaps also amplifying functioning of the
right anterior temporal lobe could be relevant to amplifying the uh signal line in the and reducing
analytic overlay so the suggestion that i'm making here is that we ought to apply transcranial magnetic
stimulation along the lines as snyder did in his experiments or tdcs to receivers or percipients in
remote viewing and gansfeld experiments during the mentation periods of those experiments this ought to
reduce their analytic overlay and thereby significantly increase hit rates and effect sizes in those experiments
by how much exactly is of course an empirical question but i've shown in a manuscript which
i give the reference to below at least in uh to the extent that it's there that if the effect size
enhancement is comparable to that found in snyder studies then at least for the gansfeld paradigm this
would yield a large effect size and replication rates of 80 to 100 percent for typical sample sizes and
using selected participants in the gansfeld paradigm so that is the end of my presentation and feel free to
uh email me with questions if you have any and thank you for your attention
thank you manili very cool we heard before from david about measuring brain activity and thanks to you
we heard about manipulating it i appreciated that by paying attention to neurodivergent cases i could say
we can also learn how to use what we know about the brain then to enhance psi and maybe think again
about the brain as a filter and what things we can do to open the filter more it also brought my attention
ethical considerations that we don't have time to discuss but that's a very powerful for the good and for
the bad weapon and well very cool and also i ian mcgilchrist work come came to mind and uh about the hemispheres
and of course the recent work by freeman friedman's lab doing a pk task with stimulation so thank you
thank you for bringing this to to everyone here tonight i should note that friedman's uh experiments
were uh i originally suggested those experiments to morris in around 2014 which then he subsequently
developed and worked out and so it's cool to see that it all it seems to work at least along the
lines of pk micro pk i didn't know that it's it's so so great you did that wonderful thank you all right
all right all right so finally before the break we have adam curry whom i'll spotlight in a second
and one second all right thank you for being here with us adam it's all yours
all right hey friends good to be with you on the call so my name is adam curry and i'm one of the
co-creators of the entangled app which damon mentioned before and with that i will cue some slides
okay entangle is a free mobile app it's designed to be a platform for doing psi research in new and
progressive ways this is what it looks like if you're curious you can go to entangled.org and download it
by moving psi research in some way into a mobile app you get to do a lot of cool things one of which is
you can conduct rigorous experiments in a very efficient way and you can kind of pose new questions
in the psi world and have a lot of fun doing it we are doing a number of different experiments but
in addition to those we've got a couple of moon shots and i'll discuss one of them
so one entangled moonshot is future forecasting or to put another way is it possible to use
psi effects like global consciousness to provide actionable insights about the future
now the nature of moonshot of course is that it's very ambitious uh it's a little sci-fi sometimes uh
maybe a little preposterous but uh i think it's important to push the boundaries and uh and to be
playful
so can we use psi to forecast the future well this is not new uh there have been many methods developed
you know going back to old times uh for forecasting things like remote viewing and tarot card reading
and rune casting eaching pendulums etc uh these are all methods of trying to recover information
uh across time and bring it to uh bring it to awareness where you can either measure it or you
can act upon it depending on where your goals are so if you were to look at all of these uh forecasting
methods and you were to ask yourself is there some sort of common denominator here like what can we learn
um about looking at all of these things and at risk of uh deeply oversimplifying this uh you might come up
with a model that looks like this uh the human subconscious mind is the thing that has access to
information across time and space or is somehow capable of retrieving information across time and space
or maybe retrieving information that it will receive one day via feedback and so the goal is
to try to get that information from the subconscious mind up into the conscious mind where it becomes
useful right and so this is where something like controlled remote viewing comes in you want to start
writing down your impressions that are bubbling up from the subconscious to the conscious mind
uh with uh rune casting or tarot cards your subconscious mind theory goes shuffles the deck
in just the right way or throws the dice in just the right way or influences the outcome of either
to pick a card that's meaningful that provides you with some sort of intel
so um i got to thinking while all of those methods are useful and have historical precedents some of
which have been studied empirically what would be the scalable way to tap into subconscious minds
and i think that it would look something like this you're going to want to have a network of
subconscious minds you're going to have various questions so not just one but a plurality of
questions that you want to ask about in this case uh asking about some future condition you're going to
need something like a subconscious measurement device or a subconscious sensor and that's going to render
meaningful answers in a format that can be consumed by the conscious mind and then provide feedback
in the future about what happened so uh this is what we've built um in entangled so entangled is a
mobile app the platform includes a laser-based random number generator running on a low latency
server that's producing a series of bits for every user every second and entangled is also a protocol
that governs the relationship between the users the random number generation the questions and feedback
so i'll kind of go through this really quickly but if you're interested in learning more about the
mechanics all of this is on the website entangled.org so you've got a photon source which i mentioned is
a laser and it's sending photons at a beam splitter and that basically just produces a very reliable
series of ones and zeros every user is for every user there is one bit generated per second so one bit
per user per second there are 3600 seconds in an hour which means that for every user you generate 3600 bits
now i said that the bits were structured this is part of the protocol the structure is that every bit
for each second is sorted into what we call channels so the first second is the bit for channel one the
second second is the bit for channel two channel three and so forth on up to the end of the hour which
is channel 3600 so you could think of users as rows and channels as columns and when you organize the data
in this way you suddenly have the ability to do really scalable things where you can automate data
collection and also ask a variety of different questions in a very flexible way to each user and
have all of the users if you will vote by flipping bits in the channel with their subconscious minds to
produce a total result which you can assign as the answer to that question so for example here c1
would be every user voting or flipping a bit once per second that gives you a result of 0.3 and that
can be used to give an answer to something in the future the end of each hour all of the data is
sorted into a single file which we call the block file so we've got an hour-based collection of
everything that happened in uh across the across the network so here's a real world example of something
that we actually did so the question is will an earthquake of magnitude 6.0 or above happen somewhere
in the world within the next one hour and we assigned this to channel 10 so the 10th bit of every hour
users or users are voting on and we created a objective answer criteria mean is a z-score of two or above
means yes anything less than that is a no so these are very preliminary results right and we did this over
three months and uh the results were that we had 28 qualifying earthquakes we had 101 predictions and we
had three hits meaning three of those 101 we uh the network predicted that would happen in the next hour
right so you do a chi-score on that and you get a p-value of a little more than 0.1 which is kind of
interesting but it's not statistically significant here's a few examples though uh drilling down into
the data tells you an interesting story so what you're looking at on the x-axis here is hour five
hour four hour three two and then hour one these are the hours leading up to the event so five hours
before the earthquake four hours before the earthquake etc on up to hour one and then on the y-axis you've
got the z-score there so this is one of the cases where we had a hit so um on channel 10
in that hour we got a cumulative z there of um like 2.8 something like that
that was a successful prediction same thing with this earthquake in papua new guinea
if you look at some of the misses here we have a clear trend but the z-score for that hour was not
satisfied so it's 1.2 so we didn't get we didn't register this as actually a prediction
and actually we had quite a few of these types of cases and then of course you've got misses where
there just doesn't seem to be anything going on there whatsoever now if you put all of the data
together meaning you line up all predictions and all events on the x-axis looking at 5 4 3 2 you know
one hour before what you find is this emerging trend where the z-score starts to rise towards the
prediction threshold um as the prediction criteria approaches now the way that you could interpret
this and and this is just a theory but one way to interpret this is that you're seeing this because
not everyone is well because the sciability is not evenly distributed in the network there are some
people who are very good who would be you know very talented who are producing correct predictions
and there are others that are not and it's all aggregated together that could explain uh some of
the effects that you're seeing here
so with that in mind we've got a couple of
a couple of ideas for the future things that we're working on
um ways to identify uh sci-talented individuals and bias the weights of those future predictions
on those individuals of course more users we didn't really make any announcement of the entangled
app being out there we just sort of like put it out there and uh curious what would happen on its own
and then we're building an improved feedback so um with a mobile app you have the ability to use
push notifications and other methods of feedback the sci literature seems to be pretty clear that
feedback is important and so the more that you can provide feedback on what actually happened from the
point of view of the future back to the point of view of the present uh it may increase accuracy
and of course there's future questions so one of which would be medical mysteries you can do all kinds
of cool things if you're able to retrieve information across space and time or predict the future one of
which would be the potential to accelerate scientific discoveries uh in the case of medical mysteries
there's a variety of things that you could speed up a variety of discoveries that you could speed up by
constraining the search space
um and uh there's also user questions so uh the ability for individual users to ask their own
questions to the network and for more go check out entangled.org
thanks alex appreciate you putting this event on thank you adam fascinating again
i love the apps route that's that belongs to the current times and seeing these very well crafted
quantum divination system that tabs on our unconscious is yeah it's very creative and fascinating so i wish
you good success with that i actually have the app on my phone and i'm sometimes checking how
how relevant were my my phone is being split there okay all right so that's been that's been really
amazing i've enjoyed it so much we'll have a break and in order to be on time with the schedule we'll be
back at o'clock so in 13 minutes welcome again to the second part of psy back to the future for those
who weren't here before we've been going on for two and a half hours now this is a live online free event
hosted via the paris center i see we are about 100 people still after this good good two hours and
about 650 people registered which is great you'll all receive the recording later for the participants
the speakers now a reminder that please concentrate your presentation around 15 minutes there will be
no q a and if you don't mind introduce yourself when you begin so that people especially those who are
not into our field can locate you and know what you do where you're coming from where you work so
we'll go now with ed kelly there ed so good to have you here please unmute yourself and you're ready to go
whenever you want sorry you need to unmute you need to unmute yourself
can you hear me now yes go ahead please um i'm ed kelly i work at the division of perceptual studies
dops at the university of virginia in the psychiatry department uh together with marina and david that
you've heard from already and several other people as well uh we're one of the main university-based
groups working in this area now i should say right away that um i'm one of the old timers in this area
and i'm looking at this event from a slightly different point of view not so much concerned about telling
people about my own experimental work which is really mostly in the past at this point
but i want to convey particularly to people who are sort of choice points in their careers
out there in the audience young people thinking about how they want to spend their career do they
want to invest time in this field or people you know in mid-career that are kind of stuck place and
wondering about what to do next and the main message that i want to convey is that despite its historical
difficulties and lack of resources and all that we've already accomplished quite a bit
and are in fact part of a much bigger story that's currently unfolding in western intellectual history
anyway let me just go back to the beginning i'm one of the few who started in this area straight out of
graduate school um i actually did a postdoc here during most of which i was reading parapsychology
literature communicating with jb ryan at his lab down in durham north carolina and at the end of it
i went down there and began working for him doing experimental parapsychology
at the time that was the main center of experimental parapsychology certainly in the u.s if not in the
world uh and although it's uh widely um uh disparaged these days i have to say that ryan was really the
right guy in the right place at the right time who did a great deal uh to put the subject on the map
intellectually to solve a lot of the early experimental and statistical problems begin systematically
uh providing evidence of the reality of these phenomena um the only other thing i want to mention
about my time there is that i i had the great good fortune very early on uh to meet with a guy who was
undoubtedly one of the best people ever to come into a parapsychology laboratory this guy could do
practically anything we asked him to do often to extreme levels of significance and i have to say that
although i was pretty convinced by the stuff i had read when i began working there my encounter with
this person was what finally convinced me uh for all time that these phenomena really do exist as facts
of nature and in fact that's one of the main things i want to say to this group is that my informed
and considered opinion on this subject is that the 150 or so year history of systematic scientific work
involving things like spontaneous cases field studies quasi experimental work of various kinds
and a couple of thousand probably i've never tried to count them uh experimental studies of psi have
produced a body of evidence that in my opinion should be sufficient to convince any reasonable person
who takes the trouble to study it that these phenomena do in fact exist as facts of nature
that's extremely important because uh one thing that lots of people recognize and that was the real
reason why i became interested in the first place is that the kind of prevailing picture of things
is that picture were true this stuff should not happen and yet it does the implication i think is clear
that our science-based picture of the world is going to have to change in some fundamental way
in order to accommodate them and it's really that part of the picture that i want to dwell upon here
is a little different from what you've been hearing so far and before i start that let me just
say in passing that it's hugely encouraging me as i head for the exits to find so many bright young
people coming into the field you know there were there had been times during my 50 plus association
50 plus a year association with the field when we weren't so sure that the people leaving were going
to be replaced so it's really great to find this infusion of new creativity may it continue okay well um
you know the the picture that prevails particularly in the parts of academia that i've inhabited psychology
and neuroscience or really practically every part of science except maybe for physics fundamental physics
physics is dominated by a picture of reality that is said to be science-based that's specifically
associated with physics classical physics as it had evolved up to the end of the 19th century
physicalism or materialism as it used to be called this is a philosophical doctrine that's kind of come
along for the ride uh and that in my opinion is no longer satisfactory uh you know the basic picture
we've all heard it reality is out there independent of us it's made up at bottom of whatever's the latest
smallest thing in physics uh we are immensely complicated biological machines manufactured out of that stuff
whatever it is mind and consciousness are generated by neurophysiological processes in our bodies and brains
and of course when we when we die it slides out nothing can possibly survive the only way we get
information into us is through our sensory surfaces and all that uh that's the standard story and most
people believe it in a semi-conscious not really thought out manner it's become the received wisdom of
opinion elites all over the world and it arguably has a great deal to do with the disenchantment of
modern civilization and the kinds of horrendous problems that we now face as a civilization
we'll try to go into that lots of people have written about it um so where do we go from here well
certainly one step in the right direction is to try to find an enhanced expanded kind of theory
that will permit the occurrence of these phenomena along with other things related to them
um and that's what i have been involved with myself for the past couple of decades we've produced a
series of three big books uh the first of which irreducible mind was intended to summarize a lot of the
evidence against this physicalist mainstream picture and at the top of any list of phenomena that
conflict with that picture certainly are all the psi phenomena what makes them so so interesting
uh but we didn't want to write a book about psi so we provided an annotated bibliography for that
and moved on to a number of other things you know the prevailing view particularly among psychologists
and neuroscientists is that well this parapsychology stuff yes it's challenging but it's it's unique one of
a kind we can put it off in quarantine isolate it and go on about our business without concern for
other things no i'm sorry there are a number of other things and we cover several of them in irreducible
mind they include things like extreme psychophysical influence hypnotic blisters stigmata stuff like that
the problems in memory the theory of memory and research on memory alan gold had a good chapter on
that in our book ndes and out-of-body experiences and near-death experiences uh concentrating especially
i must say as a psychologist and neuroscientist on experiences that occur under extreme physiological
conditions such as deep general anesthesia and or cardiac arrest in which most neuroscientists and
psychologists would think that no experience can be possible at all let alone the most intense and
transformative experiences of people's lives which are in fact being reported under such conditions
we also talked about uh things like multiple personality dissociative identity disorder where there
seem to be multiple persons of some sort uh operating in a single organism somehow sharing its neurobiological
resources extreme forms of creativity exemplified by the indian mathematician ramanujan a wordable freak of nature
and mystical experiences which even more than creativity have been largely ignored in contemporary
psychology and neuroscience and neuroscience and i must say uh when attended to at all
usually um marginalized and pathologize in ways that are really unfortunate uh our society
is unique in its disregard for these kinds of experiences which are foundational for
philosophical systems developed in particular in
uh east asian traditions and even native american traditions and so on um so this first book irreducible mind i
think uh did two things uh one it provided a whole empirical dimension to the attacks that are increasing
on physicalism in many quarters um strengthening that attack in general and it also uh supported a
an alternative to the prevailing picture of consciousness in relation to the brain
uh the generally accepted view right now is that everyday consciousness is basically all the consciousness
consciousness there is associated with each of us together with supporting stuff that goes on
on unconsciously in our brains now william james and fwh myers had a very different view of things
as early as the late 19th century that i personally believe is closer to the truth of the matter
in which each of us is associated with a larger consciousness the everyday consciousness
is part of a more extensive consciousness somehow associated with us it might be in multiple layers
that we know very little about and those layers of larger consciousness are the source
of things such as psi extreme forms of creativity and mystical experience now that picture
um lends itself to usually important practical developments along the lines that monnelli talked
about just a little bit ago that is and by the way you wouldn't have to accept the myers james story
in order to be interested in this kind of work even if the conventional picture were true
you would want to do this kind of work which is basically i think this is the principal
task of um consciousness studies going forward is to identify conditions in the brain and body in the
brain in particular that permit the expression of these higher abilities wherever they come
and monnelli talked specifically about one approach to that problem we would have to know more about what
the relevant correlations are before we can deploy it really effectively i think but one clear emerging contender
is the so-called default mode network which seems to be deactivated in a lot of circumstances that
allow psi-like things and deep states of meditation and hypnosis and so on to occur this is very consistent
very consistent with myers's principle by the way that the what he called the subliminal self or the
this alternative view of an unconscious expresses itself in proportion to the kind of disabling of the
everyday or superliminal consciousness so that's the sort of practical and experimental side going forward
but this picture also lends itself to an alternative kind of metaphysical context which i think will
ultimately be necessary we're going to have metaphysics no matter what and it's a question of whether we're
going to have good metaphysics or bad metaphysics and the following two books we took a stab at this
and irreducible mind but the following two books really have much more to do with it and they were
beyond physicalism in 2015 and consciousness unbound in 2021 so i recommend those of you who are
interested in such things to go have a look at those the picture um there are way too many details
to get into here but what what comes out of our exploration of this subject which started with
comparison of a bunch of existing frameworks old and new that take psi phenomena seriously and try to
imagine how the world must really be constituted in order that these things can happen uh to try to
find their sort of common tendencies and so on and again without attempting to get into the weeds about
any of this the basic story is that we seem in my opinion to be lurching toward what amounts to
the metaphysical opposite of the prevailing physicalism that is some kind of a monism an idealist monism
but one which is also realist as opposed to berkeleyan type metaphysics uh and the the focus of effort
right now in my opinion is to try to identify a version of such a theory that is demonstrably consistent
with developments in more modern physics such as relativity and especially quantum theory so
that's where i'm putting my juice uh what i have left and uh i encourage people to pay attention because
i do think that we are really right on the verge of a major um inflection point in western intellectual
history that will result in the overthrow of this physicalist worldview its replacement by something
humanly better and maybe a at least a small step towards saving ourselves from the various catastrophes
that presently loom so that's really all i intended to say now we'll stop there
thank you ed wonderful and thank you for speaking in the name of the old times and honoring the legacy and also
expressing that you see hope in the current times uh it's very important that in this whole gathering we have
that we hear this aspect about the metaphysics that's holding all of this together and your claim as a
true expert that these phenomena exist and so even if some people think they should not happen
and yet they do so what we need to do is also change the picture of reality we have
so basically to have new theories that make those phenomena possible given that they actually take
place and and finally i would just like to add words of gratitude to your service in to this field with
these trinity books that were cooked um for many years also through conversations at sln and maybe that's
a good moment also to mention these institutes that we've been hearing from ions dobs metaphysics
institute sln like still standing hubs where you know these treasures are kept alive so thank you
thank you ed thank you okay next we have david luke thank you so much david for coming to this event and
giving us your thoughts and one more thing by the way and thank you for the people who are in the
chat adding links adding the names of these books and clarifying questions i love to see that the chat
is active given that we don't have time for for q a but there's also kind of sharing and learning going
on there in the chat david all yours thank you so much alex uh thank you for having me along uh it's nice
to be among some extraordinary heaven heavyweights in the field um uh i can still consider myself to
be one of the younger members but not so young these days uh i'm associate professor of psychology
at the university of greenwich and i'm also delighted to announce that i've just been appointed uh parrot
warwick senior researcher which is uh a fund which has been administered through trinity college
cambridge for the last 90 years uh and uh i'm going to be diverging a little bit away from psychedelics
in that project and looking more into lucid dreaming uh but still as regards to precognition
uh my area of research i call exceptional human experience you know from ria white and susan brown
so it's broader than just psy but i have done some amount of psy research over the years
particularly as these experiences intersect with what i call uh you know psychedelic experiences
uh and looked at a whole range of interesting and sometimes bizarre phenomena that may occur in
those states but i'm going to talk about psy primarily in this talk uh reasons why uh psychedelics
may be uh considered useful for exploring size because indigenous peoples the world over have been
using them for thousands of years in many cases and in all those cases they do it explicitly to
transcend time and space and bring back useful information uh be that about the future or
location of different distant objects or animals or people to go and visit or whatever it might be
uh the first explorers and discoverers of psychedelics on their encounters with these
indigenous peoples and discoveries of new psychedelics uh pretty much always had their own paranormal
like experience uh for instance uh on first encountering this uh mazatek shaman donna rulio the wassons
who we can thank in many ways i guess for discovering and bringing psilocybin from the indigenous people to
the rest of the world uh consulted donna rulio who told them several things about their son back home in
the states which they did not know and which both turned out to be true uh demonstrating perhaps some
kind of precognition or even telepathy possibly precognition one of the events hadn't even happened
at that time uh on the very first encounter of westerners with uh psilocybin mushrooms and of course
uh some of those mushrooms later ended up in the lab of albert hoffman the swiss chemist who had a few
years earlier discovered lsd and had his own paranormal like experience when he had something
akin to a near-death experience uh was slightly disturbed by that and um decided to have a medical
doctor on hand when he uh tested the various alkaloids of the mushrooms from mexico and discovered
psilocybin uh probably didn't help him having a medical doctor there because he uh as he came over to
to check his pulse he he saw him as a aztec priest you know resplendent with feathered headdress and
instead of holding a stethoscope coming at him with a an obsidian knife to cut out his beating heart
which kind of rather disturbed poor old albert but uh he also noticed however how on many occasions when
he gave psilocybin to people in switzerland who did not know of the provenance of of these mushrooms
that they'd often have visions of aztec temples and aztec artwork and mayan and aztec uh motifs
and he uh actually attended one of the first parapsychology conference exploring the intersection
between psychedelics and parapsychology and suggested it some kind of psychometry that uh taking these
substances gave access to the uh the consciousness of the original users of these these uh these fantastic
uh plants and fungi uh of course the psychedelics didn't stay in the laboratories from the for long
and and started becoming pioneered in in psychotherapy uh people like stan groff of course
who became very much the godfather of psychedelic psychotherapy and conducted several thousand
sessions over a couple of decades and reported observing patients experiencing past life recall out
body experiences esp particularly precognition accurate remote viewing and space-time travel
on a daily basis this is a somewhat of an occupational hazard for psychedelic psychotherapists at least
it was in the 60s uh in groff's day um of course the psychedelics didn't stay in the therapy rooms
either and started becoming used recreationally if we can call it that and uh throughout that time
onwards you know throughout the 1970s and onwards and a number of surveys have attested to the power of
psychedelics to induce experiences of uh psi if not actual genuine psi very commonly people report the
experience such as telepathy the majority of people who've used these substances report those experiences
whilst under the influence of the psychedelics themselves and i backed that up of course with my
own survey research as well i found pretty similar stuff and that's how i started out in this area
and it's not just that people are drawn to taking psychedelics are prone to having uh psi experiences
necessarily because the more substances people take the more experiences they have as well um so
experiences is one thing but what about actual real psi phenomena if it can be tested and brought into the
laboratory and pinned down in some way and of course there were many early endeavors that occurred
throughout the 1960s and 70s this kind of crossover between parapsychology and psychedelic research
uh some giants of the field like walter pancake who conducted the good friday experiments conducted his
own esp experiments with lsd as well um but the science and maybe the technology of the time was uh i mean of
its time and you know forced choice uh protocols were very much uh the de rigueur of of research in
those days and there was a number of experiments which were conducted over a number of years primarily
using the forced choice method um so card guessing tasks primarily but often getting people to try and
guess xena cards for several hours at a time and in the vast majority of those experiments participants
were having their first ever psychedelic experience um and uh they also lacked good adequate controls
but often you know the participants themselves would say things like it was psychedelically immoral
to get people to do these kind of card guessing tasks for hours on end on their first ever mystical
experience uh so as you might imagine the results of those experiments weren't particularly impressive
there were a few uh free response design experiments which were perhaps more conducive to the the person's
experience uh nevertheless they were even more poorly controlled uh because it's very difficult to gauge
your uh subjective interpretations of uh of targets if there's no kind of decoys and that they
didn't tend to use decoys in these early experiments nevertheless in those free response
studies uh i'd say about half of them reported positive findings at the very least but
not under very well controlled conditions so what do we know about the potential of psychedelics to
induce genuine psi in laboratory controlled uh protocols i attempted to follow up on all this uh by
doing my own experiments i'm going to tell you about four experiments i've done uh i won't spend too much
time on the first one which was with uh ayahuasca uh which i uh collected the data whilst in brazil and
ecuador going into ayahuasca ceremonies i stupidly perhaps used a forced choice protocol as well using
fractal targets um i won't dwell on it nevertheless the results were not very good uh they participants
actually scored lower in the precognition in the ayahuasca condition on precognition than in the
control condition however uh i did a pre-measure and a post and a during measure and uh with control
as well and we actually find a decline effect uh in both the control and the experimental condition which
tells me that my experiment isn't very good uh whether you're tripping or not um because it looks
like there's some uh order effects possibly test fatigue or boredom so i wisely perhaps opted to
move towards a free response design i also shifted my focus towards uh another uh shamanic psychoactive
this time san pedro cactus which contains mescaline working in ecuador um i'd attempted to do
again 20 participants doing a trial each of my experimental design uh and uh i found a shaman
who was willing to let me do that experiment uh until i pulled out my laptop and then he was like
oh no all your electromagnetic juju will scare away the spirits you can't come into my ceremony with that
so i had to uh rethink my experimental design and running out of time i figured that if i just get
one person to do 20 trials instead of 20 people to do one trial each is more or less the same thing
and i found one person to do that experiment and that was me so i did a self-experimentation
uh using a free response design uh four stages process very much like a dream esp or a gansfeld setup
uh there's a visualization stage a viewing a voting and then of course verification this is precognition
design so i under the influence of the mescaline i would come up with lots of florid imagination which
i would try and kind of corral into something concrete i could write down very brief just a
visualization about my idea of what the future target might be i knew there were four one minute
video clips one of which was a target i would view those four video clips i would vote on them i'd say
how similar they were to my mental imagery uh for my intended precognitive target so perhaps it might
be quite a lot like the matrix uh a bit of the overview effect uh not very much like rick and morty
in a smattering of mary poppins uh pretty standard psychedelic experience really and then of course then
use a random number generator to then determine which one was the actual target in the future
the results of that experiment were uh surprisingly pretty good i got a 40 hit rate which turned out
to be independently significant uh by some of ranks so i was at least encouraged by my protocol um but of
course doing n of one self-experimentation studies isn't going to convince anybody i was lucky enough to
be working on a clinical drug trial with lsd and we managed to shoehorn this precognition task
into the protocol uh we had uh 13 participants this time and a placebo double blind control condition
where they didn't know if they were getting either lsd or a placebo and they did one precognition trial
either on lsd or not an lsd and uh the results of which were quite interesting 13 participants this
time very small sample size unfortunately and i got a significant result independently in the lsd condition
however it was in the opposite direction a sign missing effect uh overwhelmingly the participants
tended to rank the target clip as the least like their specific mentation now there may have been some
older effects because they they all did the lsd condition second however more interestingly there
were some personality covariates of this quite strong ones in fact for such a small sample in that uh those
scoring higher higher scores tended to correlate with low neuroticism uh higher extroversion and higher
openness to experience um it just so happens that my scientists were all quite neurotic introverted
and not very open to experience so probably not the best uh target sample for this they were all top
level scientists uh the participants themselves um but we do find that in you know meta-analyses of
uh psychological covariates of psi that openness to experience and extroversion have been noted so that
you know is in keeping with previous research finally for my last experiment i decided not to use
scientists as scientists as as participants i we had a group of hardened psychonauts at all very much used
to taking psychedelics and this time was part of a dmt study dimethyltryptamine a very potent short
acting psychedelic lasts about 10 minutes uh i in this particular study uh actually that's those results i've
got 20 participants uh uh in this later level of the study and uh the results were a bit more impressive
we found that uh when we did a pair samples test they either had a a test on dmt or not on dmt and
uh the order was was varied so they either did the the non-dmt version one before or after the dmt experience
and we found that this was uh significant when comparing across the groups however
that'd be i was delighted with that initially but when we look at the scores we find that
the participants reliably scored above chance on dmt but below chance when they were not on dmt so they
were scoring in the opposite direction now had it been due to the dmt alone we would probably expect
just at chance scoring when they weren't on dmt and so this leads me to suspect this is probably
some kind of social facilitation effect that they're they are trying to please the experimenter by
utilizing their unconscious psi to get good results um so that and combined with the study from the lsd
where participants it turns out these top level scientists primarily were not believers in psi or but
one of them expressed any kind of belief in the possibility of size so they were signed non-believers
and this leads me to think that psychedelics may be a good leverage for enhancing psi but they do so
by um playing into prior beliefs and expectations and allowing the participant to believe that the
impossible is suddenly possible or at least that's my current working hypotheses
uh i think that's my 15 minutes up um thank you for your attention you can find details of most of
that research or some of that research at least in in my book uh psychedelics and exceptional human
experience thank you
thank you david and congratulations on your new position
um so interesting to speak about who should be the optimal participants of these experiences and
and also somewhat funny to realize that maybe scientists are not the best pools of people to
try this i also like your story about the was the shaman not wanting our tools there which speaks about
different worlds and how we may try to have some overlap when we study these things and congratulations
for being the the experimenter and the experiencer at the same time supposed to experience it yourself
first and also to convince yourself first and sure the the expectations whether you believe this is
possible you you believe it's not possible matter and so it's even more complex
than some people think how we should study this because this idea of that the experimenter is
not there or that the participant can be somewhat obstructed well it's quite the contrary which makes
things more difficult as we can see but maybe more fascinating thank you david
all right next we have jeffrey mishlove i'll add you to spotlight and
there i am the floor is yours jeffrey thank you so much for being with us tonight
okay well a pleasure to be with you alex and a pleasure to see so many friends in the parapsychology
community here this is a lovely event i'm particularly happy to see ed kelly because
it reminded me that when i attended my first parapsychology association conference in 1973
at the university of virginia in charlottesville i have a very vivid memory of riding on a bus on a
visit to monticello sitting right behind ed and his then wife and we had a lovely conversation that
is still in my mind about how much you admired the work of ian stevenson as a matter of fact and
so i'm delighted to to have a chance to to see you here ed i have wanted to get you on the new
thinking aloud channel i hope someday we can still do that in psychology there are two basic approaches
to research that are known as ideographic or namathetic namathetic research is the dominant
style and it involves doing tests with groups of people to try and find significant differences
between groups in order to test hypotheses
ideographic research involves detailed studies of a single person and in my career after
obtaining a doctoral degree in parapsychology at berkeley that i designed myself through an
individual interdisciplinary program i spent the next 11 years studying a single individual and
and wrote about him in a book called the pk man one of the things about ideographic research that i
have found and it's true in my own life certainly is that psi events can be life-changing they can turn a
person's life around completely so when i was in 1972 roughly a year before i met ed at the parapsychology
conference a year and a half before i had a powerful dream the most powerful dream of my life if you had
known me back then you would have seen a graduate student in criminology not parapsychology i was doing
work at san quentin prison in california volunteering in the psychiatric unit and running group therapy sessions
with murderers and rapists when this dream occurred and it was about 7 30 in the morning
on a sunday and my great uncle harry came and appeared to me we had a lengthy conversation
when i awakened from the dream i was a different person i was crying tears of joy and singing at the
same time one of the most sacred songs in my religious tradition of judaism and at that moment
i resolved that i had to change i could no longer spend the the rest of my life focusing on the negative
side of human deviance crime and mental illness i realized i had to change i had to focus on to me
what i what i identified as the positive side of human deviance meaning mysticism psychic functioning
intuition and creativity of course there were very few opportunities to do that in a university i soon
learned i was at berkeley one of the world's great universities but they just didn't have programs of
the sort that i wanted i struggled with that and it seemed as if i was being guided by dreams because
eventually i developed the wherewithal to to create my own individual doctoral major
and ever since then i've wanted to provide the same opportunity for other people which meant for me
defining parapsychology a bit differently than as merely a branch of experimental psychology
but rather looking at parapsychology as part of a tradition that included ancient shamanism and yoga and
other historical practices involving the cultivation of psi abilities now only recently this year
i have partnered with the california institute for human science to establish graduate degree programs both
a master's degree and a doctoral degree fully accredited with specializations in parapsychology and i think the
california institute for human science is is a good home for this kind of program because their vision is
is similar to to the one i developed when i created my own individual degree at berkeley and i'm going to tell
you a little bit about how this unusual college was founded it was founded by a japanese scientist named
hiroshi modoyama who was very interested in esp who also corresponded with jb ryan at the time and and did esp
experiments with ryan's assistance modoyama though was also a shinto priest of a sort of an obscure
shinto sect in japan that and and here's where i'm a little confused it said that it was founded by his
mother but it's not clear to me whether it was his biological mother or what they called his spiritual
mother nevertheless here is another amazing story an ideographic story of how an individual life can be
totally turned around by a psi experience and i've collected a number of these stories in this case this woman
was very depressed and about to commit suicide by jumping off a cliff and in fact she did she jumped off the cliff
and the gust of wind came and blew her back onto the uh the cliff the ground she she was saved by a gust of
wind and you can imagine the impact that that must have had on her it was then that she founded this shinto
in japan which uh attracted it's a small sect but it attracted many wealthy powerful people in japan and
then dr hiroshi modoyama her son became the high priest of the sect and he decided i am going to
create a new kind of create a new kind of educational program and they bought real estate in california he
came to the united states opened this college they started out i think with only two or three students
but modoyama's approach was one of integrating yoga and other spiritual traditions with science
he developed a device that measured the electrical currents in each of the fingertips associated with
the various acupuncture meridians and did a lot of very interesting research on acupuncture meridians and
on the chakras he developed a device i understand very early on that could measure single photons
being emitted from the human body and showed that in the particular locations where historically
traditionally chakras are said to be located along the central spinal column the uh that how can i put it
there were more photons being emitted uh at those particular locations so cihs is a school very open
to what we now call transpersonal psychology to the to the many spiritual traditions in fact they have i
think probably the only program in the world that i'm aware of dealing with the question of ufos and
non-human intelligence and offering um fully accredited graduate degrees in those areas they um that is
their noetic track which is a little different the parapsychology specialization is located in the
psychology department which is transpersonal and positive psychology and is very holistic in its
orientation so i'm i'm mentioning all of these things because some of you may be interested in
in getting a parapsychological education and uh this i know there are many opportunities particularly in
europe but this is a unique opportunity just opening up in the united states and and i want to make sure
that people know about it especially for those of you who are more oriented toward
the transpersonal or the spiritual side of things let me give you a few more examples of individuals
whose lives were totally turned around by having had a psi experience one such person is a well-known
philosopher i studied his work as an undergraduate a.j air one of the leading philosophical figures in the
logical positivist movement and and he was british but he was also famous for being an atheist until he
had his own near-death experience turned him around and uh he said i can no longer be an atheist after
having had that experience it was a very prominent conversion uh another case like um well many of
these cases occur to people who are not atheists people who are open-minded like like myself when i had
this powerful dream of my uncle harry i was already predisposed to thinking about transpersonal mysticism
and and psychic functioning i'd already done a lot of study in that area but i wasn't ready to
devote my whole life to having a career in that field that was a a huge jump so there are several
examples of of that sort one of them uh that i like to cite is uh was very prominent in the 1960s
bishop james pike who was the bishop of the episcopal church in california and bishop pike's son committed
suicide and so he he sought solace and he was in england at the time where the english episcopalians
were very close to the english spiritualists and he was guided to a medium and he felt he had a very
lengthy two-hour conversation with his son through the uh help of of this medium and also through a man
who would recently died who was his spiritual advisor the theologian paul tillick and he was so moved
by these experiences he resigned his position as bishop in order to devote himself more to a deeper study
of spirituality he wanted to understand the origins of the christian religion and also to explore more
of the question of life after death i think i have time for one more quick story which is a case of
elizabeth kubler ross she was known as as a person who who defined the the five stages of grieving
and time magazine once listed her as is one of the hundred most influential people in the world
so her work rose to great prominence but earlier in her career she was very disheartened she felt that
her workshops weren't going well she was getting ready to resign and leave this work completely
she incidentally she incidentally along with raymond moody were the first people to write about the
near-death experience and she's standing by an elevator in the university of chicago and is it getting ready
to tell the supervisor who was standing next to her that she's about to resign when a woman walks up to
her and says can i walk with you to your office and as they're walking she didn't resign she recognizes
that woman as mrs schwartz mrs schwartz was the woman who first introduced her to the concept of the near
death experience but mrs schwartz had died and here she was fully physical walking next to elizabeth
kubler ross and as they get to the office kubler ross says i'm sorry mrs schwartz says to kubler ross
promise me you will not leave this work and kubler ross says i will make you that promise under one
condition will you write a little note for me saying that we have made this agreement that i will promise
and sign it mrs schwartz did that she walked out of kubler ross's office kubler ross was stunned but
she had a pay a note a written note from this woman who was presumably deceased she stepped to the office
door to look down the hallway and see if mrs schwartz was there but there was no one there
and that of course led to kubler ross's brilliant career well i think my time is up so i'll i'll stop
here it's wonderful to be with all of you thank you very much jeff we were with you you didn't have
to end so abruptly that that's been truly lovely and let me tell you that you're a together with ed
you you're a living history walking living history of this field and also a very kind man and a
pioneer in your research plus the education plus the outreach with thinking aloud and you thinking aloud
thank you for reminding us that sometimes one experience can convert a person as opposed to a
thousand reasons and also thank you for emphasizing here the ideographic research where it pays off to
study one person when they embody when they're kind of an embodied anomaly that can crack the the walls
of the system and and by the way in orthodox science this happens too we have the hm patient in
neuroscience and just that just gave us a completely new understanding and i see here in the audience
annika and tristan are there i have um also my my beloved vicente the blind man with whom i've seen
amazing things last week i was in utah in the vibra vision course and i met mass dave who's another
walking miracle so totally there are incredible people out there and we can learn so much um both
scientifically but also it can change their own lives when things happen to us like when our filter
breaks and the light gets in thank you jeff thank you very much
all right so next we have james potty's wood um so good that you're here uh let me
you need to unmute yourself thank you so much for making it and also thank you for hosting in the
way you know this amazing community that we are celebrating here tonight james the first years
thank you very much alex thank you for hosting this thing it's very interesting and um a lot of
people and it's a good format i think for sort of spreading ideas so congratulations on thinking it
up and executing it um so a little background for anybody who doesn't know me uh uh initial work was
in uh general relativity i was doing a phd in it which i never finished i went off and started a
computer company uh i've always been fascinated by the mind-body problem that sort of goes back to
memories from five six years old um when i was in my teens i was in freudian analysis for five years
and then subsequently got a very deep interest in jung so the idea of um paranormal events as
synchronistic in the sense that jungland it seemed to me to be uh in accord with my own experience i
would say and i had a couple of very extraordinary experiences in my 20s which i'm not going to go
into in detail but which combined uh large-scale synchronicities which several people witnessed and
it was a very formative experience it led me to believe that maybe there was something in this stuff
but uh from a very early age it was clear to me that there was an extreme tension between the
extraordinary amount that we've managed to understand about the physical world and now a vast range of
scales uh and the life of the mind which there seemed to be no way that you could incorporate the
two into one consistent model of things so uh with that background uh i attended the 100th anniversary of
the spr the society for psychical research and the 25th anniversary which coincided at trinity college
uh the debate about the uh gansfeld chuck honiton and others this has already been mentioned this
discussion occurred there it's a quite a historic event i read the last 10 years of the literature
in the field before going to it thinking it would be the right thing to do anyway long story short i was
very interested i ended up consulting to sri for the best part of a decade and this was during the time
that ed may and russ tag and others were doing both classified work which i had no access to not
having any security clearance but also a lot of experimental work and the the mandate on the program
was essentially does this thing exist how does it work and can we do anything useful with it and
it's become most known i guess for doing something useful with it in terms of intelligence for the
intelligence community that were funding it but it also did a lot of fundamental work on
attempting to answer how it worked and out of that came something called decision augmentation
theory which i think it's a bit of a misnomer to call it a theory it's really an observation it's a
phenomenal logical which basically says that psychokinesis at least in the micro sense of
people hitting buttons on a computer and trying to generate more ones than zeros this has been
mentioned already that that is nothing to do with forcing the world to go into a particular state
but rather is a form of precognition where we're able to sense that the upcoming bit stream
favors the hypothesis and we hit the button at the right time and get statistics which show
that we're biasing the sample so it's a it's a sampling process and i that's although there's
still arguments about whether dat dat is a correct description of the micro pk stuff i have to say
that's colored my view of this whole thing um so i was at sri for for about 10 years the projects then
moved to science applications international saic uh and it continued there and then went on to
ed may's private lab and we continued to work uh on things to do with remote viewing and then
latterly with pre-stimulus response the physiological measures that were mentioned earlier today
uh that free uh that that that that occur before stimuli are presented to a subject the canonical
experiment is you hit somebody with a a a a very a rousing image or a loud sound
you get a post-stimulus response of the physiology there's an increase in heart rate and skin
conductance the question is is there a little response prior to the stimulus and there's good
evidence that there is um so i now work as a consultant physicist and applied mathematician
i'm also a distinguished scholar at the california institute of human studies which jeffrey just
mentioned so that that's kind of my background and the whole thing uh i covered it still with the
same point of view that there's an extreme tension between the world we see through physics and the
world we see through power psychology and the mind-body problem um my overpowering interest is to figure
out how that works uh so i'm basically at least in the last 20 years of my life accepted the reality
that there is such a thing uh aside at least in terms of information transfer as we see in remote
viewing and forced choice of similar esp experiments and in rng experiments as well i don't necessarily
think this model can explain massive macro pk or modifying the weather or and if those events really
do occur then the theory needs to be only i haven't got a theory but the direction i'm trying to analyze
this in that would have to be enlarged because that's a lot of energy to do such things if you're
actually manipulating the physical reality and there is the problem as well that the physics that we know
is all causally close so there doesn't seem to be any entry point for some other causation into the
processes that physics describes which are essentially the everything we see around us so um for the rest of
this talk i don't i'm not going to sort of discuss whether i think psi exists because i think it does and
you know one of the things i would point out is that parapsychology as a field is i think pretty much
unique in one sense which is that it spent probably 99 of its efforts doing the same thing over and
over again finding some different organization of people or targets or systems of various kinds which
appear to correlate in their behavior with mental events and tensions and um no other field does that
i mean it's partly because we've been on the defensive people proponents of the reality of this thing
have been on the defensive against the mainstream scientific community which by and large relegates
these things to fantasies or mistakes or uh at worst fraud experimental fraud so uh it's understandable
on the other hand i think that we're not going to make any progress if we just keep on spinning the
same wheel and saying yeah because in this new system we can do it with photons and interferometry we can
do it with rngs we can do it with xenocards or random pictures of places or the numerous paradigms and
and you know i've been looking at this field for 40 years this is a pattern we're doing this over and over again
it seems to me that what's really interesting is particularly precognition how does that work how could it
possibly work and um you can in fact make an argument that much of the research can be explained by
precognition i mean remote viewing which might appear to be sort of clairvoyance or looking at a distant
thing it could also be observation of the actual feedback if some if a participant gets that so
which normally they do so um precognition may be the fundamental phenomenon here and certainly the micro
pk thing i discussed with decision augmentation theory that that can be explained by precognition
so another point i would make while i'm on that particular hobby horse is that a protocol of any
kind which is precognitive where the decision as to what the target event or whatever it is is taken
after the data has been collected from the person and provided that rng is a real one it's a quantum rng
which we as far as we know is inherently unpredictable then such an experiment not only
immediately makes a case for precognition and retro causality if you look at it like that but also
removes all of the problems of securing protocols from people cheating or being prompted and even
unconsciously prompted and we know lots of stuff now from conventional psychology by about cognitive
biases which can be manipulated so all of those problems disappear in a precognition protocol
so what's been done on the theory aspect well i mean i'm having to summarize a ton of research
rather quickly here but several people have gone after if you like the fundamental theories of what
we know about how the physical world works of which are really now two general relativity and quantum
field theory uh and have said maybe we can do something to those to allow for these kind of events
to happen and in the case of general relativity gr uh elizabeth rousher in the 60s and 70s who was a
relativist um said well maybe we can we can we can make uh we can imagine that the metric which
describes the geometry of space-time maybe instead of being 10 real numbers it's 10 complex numbers uh so we've
now got an extra degree of freedom on each one so we've got 10 new degrees of freedom and she made
the point that if you could do if that was what was actually going on and if you could somehow
manipulate these imaginary components you could make the space-time interval uh between any two
events zero in other words if you're precognizing something on mars and if you're able to change the
metric in that way and do something to these imaginary components you can make the distance in time and
space between you and the event on mars zero so it's happening right in your consciousness so not
surprisingly you can describe it imagining a remote viewing protocol there so the trouble with doing
that of course is that if you start allowing those new degrees of freedom and they're not all zero which
is they're all zero you just get general relativity back uh all sorts of other things ought to happen which
don't so doing any kind of radical surgery to a theory like that which is very rigid and very tight
and doesn't have any loose ends in it means that the theory will predict tons and tons of things
which simply aren't observed so i i think that's basically a a killer argument for it um the other
theory which is now very fashionable as a sort of basis for an explanation of psi of course is quantum
mechanics which has all the woo-woo of entanglement and strangeness and spooky action in the distance
as einstein unfortunately put it um that looks like a prime target as well for uh envisioning how
say a remote viewing protocol might work or precognitive remote viewing protocol uh however there are some
problems and the proponents of these theories never mention the problems first of all when
they're envisioning some kind of entangled state between the state of the brain of the person who's
the participant and the state of whatever system it is that is being used as the target or the random
number generator so what i think is not often appreciated is that in quantum mechanics everything
is entangled with everything that when people talk about entangled pairs of particles what they really
mean is that they've managed to disentangle them from the environment and only entangle them with
themselves which is very difficult to do and usually involves low temperatures and isolation of all
sorts of kinds to keep extraneous external fields from interfering with them so those theories about
quantum mechanics being the basis of this have a number of major problems first of all supposing
somebody's doing a remote viewing experiment and the rng's there in princeton and i'm describing the
target how does my brain get entangled with an rng on the other side of the country
first of all secondly how does that entanglement survive for the duration of the experiment
might be an hour or two thirdly quantum mechanics comes along with its own non-signalling
theorems and says there's no way you can send a message from one side of an entangled pair to the other one
doesn't work like that and of course the fourth problem is that if you're looking at a precognitive
protocol the physics we currently have does not allow for retrocausality so there are four
big problems with with the quantum mechanical explanation
so i i always thought this is the wrong way to go about it that trying to adjust some very
sophisticated and highly accurate and highly tested theories to tweak them in such a way as to allow for
the phenomena we observe may not be the way to go about it and in fact it's not the way that science
has normally proceeded in trying to explain a new phenomenon uh a very neat little example you go back
to the 17th century people were putting gases in cylinders with pistons and compressing the gases and
measuring the pressure of the gas and the volume that it took and its temperature and you know people
like boil produced the boils law which said the pressure is inversely proportional to the volume
pv is a constant and later people put temperature in there as well so we have bv equals rt the perfect
gas law and from that arose the idea of the atomic or molecular theory of gases which
if you imagine gases as little balls bouncing off each other that gives you that same formula and that
became statistical mechanics and now we're looking at it we can we can actually see the atoms and the
gas bouncing around so these things have normally progressed from gross phenomenological level
observations level regularity like pv is a constant pressure times volume as a constant in a piston and
cylinder and from there have generalized and discovered the underlying mechanisms that gave rose to
that phenomenological level observation so i think we've got to go in the same route to have a handle or
a hope of finding a handle on explaining psi which leads one inevitably to the uh observation that
let us for the moment leave aside untestable things first of all we've made all the progress in physics we
have because we've demanded testability and full survivability on every hypothesis we consider and
essentially we made no progress in understanding the world until three or 100 years ago when this idea
came along so i i reject out of hand any metaphysics i don't think it has any purpose for us at all
let's stick to a scientific method that has obviously worked gangbusters now what does that mean in terms of
hypotheses for um psi well the first thing to be said is that it definitely is not completely non-physical
our only knowledge of psi is through physical events like participants draw something or they see
something or they press a button at a particular time or whatever there's some physical event that
originates in a participant in a person so whatever this thing is it must couple into physics that we
currently know things happen molecules change neurons fire we do things so it seems a sensible thing to
do is to start looking for where that interaction and happens and how it happens and some of the work
that's been done on neurophysiology and it was mentioned earlier uh neurophysiological measurements
during psi are attempts to get perhaps at the receptor in the brain that's responsible for this
there are other ways of looking at it which is to ask are there any physical parameters of the
environment that the participant is in that modulate their ability to do this and there's been weak but
persistent evidence that the level and particularly the level of disturbance of the magnetic fields
that people are sitting in in labs or when they do these experiments has a modulating effect
uh i found that there may be a relationship between the sidereal local sidereal time which the experiment
is done uh i'm not convinced that it is sidereal time because that's a combination of time of day
and time of year uh and it's all sorts of confounding effects could produce that but it's worth investigating
further and there may be other variables we can measure uh in the environment that may give us a clue
as to the medium or whatever you want to call it the transport mechanism for the information that we see
in these experiments so uh concluding thought is it would be great to hear more about people uh looking
hard now for the minimal uh extension to physics that we have that would give us some at least of the
side things that we observe um and that way we keep uh our knowledge of uh of the physical world's
underlying laws that's not perfect of course it's they're all approximations these theories presumably
but they're very good and to throw them away into a form of idealism where you now have to explain
all of those anew seems to me a backward step so um i think we should look for the the the least
possible extension to the physics we know which would give us the results that we see thanks very
much for your attention thank you james thank you so much you've been doing this longer than i have
been around so i always listen to you with with great air also coming from physics and discussing this
question as to what room do does physics as we know it today leave for for this and sometimes we love
to bet it on quantum or on relativity but maybe that's not the entry point so i appreciate it you
suggest we go back kind of to the drawing board and say let's find for the physical handle to these
apparently non-physical phenomena open to suggestions alex right and also thank you for mentioning the the
the fact that these pre-cognitive quantum protocols immediately get rid of a lot of pain a lot of
experimental pain in the controls yes and your remark your sociological remark on the defensiveness
of the field is also worth pondering whether we would be doing things differently if we weren't using
a substantial percentage of our energy and attention to defend ourselves justify ourselves not feel we're
stupid doing what we're doing and so on and maybe using it in a more bold way so i totally agree with
you much of our energy has been spent fending off pseudo critics in many cases yeah yeah wonderful
a waste of time thank you so much james for being here tonight thank you all right so we had julia
mosbridge was gonna come but she had an emergency hopefully we'll get a recording from her so now we'll
move to roger nelson uh spotlight you i was supposed to go at three o'clock alex sorry i i i don't understand
excuse me roger i'm sorry so we have two more people to go three more people roger stefan schwartz
and george williams and they will be done for this lovely marathon all right roger the floor is yours thank
you so much for being here tonight well thank you alex for putting this together it's quite a wonderful
occasion and i like some others very much appreciate seeing old friends and newer friends as as well
so i'm um roger nelson the uh founder and director of what's called the global consciousness project
um that was formed uh partly from the experience of um working in the hair lab i'll talk a little bit
about that but it's also influenced by having read some 30 years before the application and became
possible uh thierry de chardin's book the phenomenon of man uh in which he talked about evolution and said
we're not finished yet there's still another stage and um it's somewhere along the way i became interested
in trying to capture evidence that that next phase might already be um in a very uh in court a kind of
embryonic form might be uh out there and possible possibly um detectable using the technology that we had
developed in uh what's called psi research i worked at the pair lab princeton engineering anomalies research
from 1980 to um 20 2002 um correlating the coordinating the research which is about correlations mostly
um the first thing we had to do was develop instrumentation that we thought was reliable
and random number generators or regs or random event generators as we termed them became a very
important part of the armament we asked people to change the output of the such devices
to try to produce high numbers meaning higher than their average output or low numbers on
demand and to also sit there while the machine behaved the way it normally would
uh we call that a baseline so we had a three-part protocol which seemed a very good idea i think it
was we found highly significant results indicating that people can actually influence the output of
random number generators um about early 1990s i was able to get everything miniaturized enough so that i
could go into the field and do what we termed field research on consciousness field double entendre intended
and um here's a couple of examples we went with i went with a group um to devil's tower in wyoming
it's a natural monument uh the remains of a volcano uh with a shaman who did rituals there and during the ritual
which was about 20 minutes long the trace in that left um left hand graph was produced it's very
striking highly significant because what's expected for data like this in this kind of presentation
is a level trend a wandering trace uh but um with no trend either up or down similarly went to
egypt with a group of people interested in the ancient uh religion and um did rituals and in a way chanting
and meditation at least in many of the sacred places that we could find in the temples and in the sacred
places inside the great pyramid for example you don't have much time for detail but
in this field uh research inspired further questions what if we had more than one random number
generator and what if we had um a whole lot of them in a network and um what if we were looking at a
larger group like group uh consciousness on a global scale so princess diana's funeral in 1997 provided a
kind of prototype uh opportunity we i asked all my friends and colleagues who use these devices to
please take data they sent it to me and i put it all together and produced a one in a hundred odds uh
trace that's in red here uh remember there should be a level wandering trace for data like this
so the prototypes encouraged us to go ahead and build a network that would extend around the world we
didn't expect to be able to cover it with mathematical precision in other words we used the opportunities that
we had and uh produced a a network that grew to about 75 when it was maximum in size
um i'll give one or two examples of the kind of uh events that we looked at in the formal experiment
our hypothesis was that the data from this network of random number generators which is continuously
producing quantum based random numbers that we expected that data might change when there was a major
global event that attracted attention all over the world so the 9 11 terrorist attacks were certainly
such an event and the graph on the left shows um nine days surrounding september 11th and you can see
that at the beginning of that period of time there's a sort of level wandering trace up and down but no
trend but that change is radically close to september 11th and the change from normal random behavior
persists for about three days and then finally reverts to the expected behavior of rent of this sort of random data
the after uh 17 years we accumulated the planned 500 uh events each testing this general hypothesis 500
rigorously defined events where that means we specify the time of the beginning and the end of the event
um and with it this is without looking at any data and then extract the data that correspond and uh this
is a cumulative deviation again the this should have a level trend and you can see in a gray cloud what
random data look like in this kind of presentation it's very obvious that this is a different uh animal
all together the red trace has a uh an ultimate z score of 7.3 in other words it's seven sigma uh good
enough for government work as they say and the probability against chance is something their odds against
chance is about three trillion three trillion to one and that uh strong result uh provides a background
in which in which it's possible to have a look at other kinds of things so we did a lot of uh
local kinds of things but because the database was always publicly available other people also
chose to look at these data to see um for themselves how it worked and whether there was a
any there there um this is a graph created by olf holmberg a an economist who lives in stockholm sweden
um he decided to try to create a z index which is just a z score representing each day's uh behavior in the
whole network irrespective of the events that we were interested in in the formal experiment
and he said uh he wanted to put this uh z index into his computational models for predicting market
trends and uh ultimately also did a simulation in which he was able to determine that adding this z
index information to his models increased their viability or product productivity by something like 13
nobody so far as i know has yet tried to make any money with it but the indication or the suggestion is
that at least if you're patient and you do your work properly you should be able to make a little extra
money um just by using the publicly available gcp data here's another um analysis olf did he looked at
google search i think and created an index which he's plotted here as the dotted line to compare with a
an average z score data line from the gcp scores and you can see that the details are very different but the
general trends here are matched pretty well and that by calculation actually is a significant correlation
another person who's uh dived in or into the data um in a number of times and with different kinds of
tools is dean radin this is a picture of the results of his multi-scale entropy analysis and um the the
curve shows a lot of data but it's um it's the it's necessary to magnify it as is done in the
inset in the upper right so that you can see the difference between the original data
and the controls that he created by scrambling the original data or by using pseudorandom data
it's a highly significant difference and basically it says what this says is that distributed throughout
this uh 20 plus year database there is um some uh extra negative entropy or neg entropy uh the in other
words there's some structure that shouldn't be there in this random data created by human consciousness
or at least it's correlated with human consciousness here's a very specific uh recent analysis dean did
where he uh took um all the new year's midnight uh new year's eve midnight transitions over 26 years
and uh created a the composite that is shown in white against the background of all 365 days
uh in in the in the black uh cloud very strong and clear uh difference from expected uh random behavior
with a minimum that's pretty close to midnight so maybe a minute and a half or two minutes before midnight
so um i began to think about other ways another perspective for looking at the data not just
uh the cumulative deviation uh this is on the left the figure shows cumulative correlation or cumulative
deviation over all of the 500 formal events and in the right-hand branches that same data
deconvolved to get to become to work with the raw data now treated as if it were
uh very noisy data from perhaps something like a brain eeg measure in other words i use the technology or
techniques of brain eeg testing to see a see what the data would look like if you start with the raw data
and treat it as if it were data from a brain this the left hand figure is an evoked response from a human
brain stimulus and the right hand figure is this uh what we might think of as the gcp data uh stimulated by
events in the world i'll show it this picture is will give you a little easier uh look at the data
from from in this case all significant six hour long events and i picked that uh subset because
they're the most likely i would i think we could argue to be showing some sort of activity in
the data because they have achieved significance by our normal criteria the raw data for that's in the
upper right and in the lower left is a first uh level of smoothing you can begin to see a pattern
but with additional smoothing that pattern begins to look very much like the uh evoked response potential
that we see in brain research so uh what's next the future for this program is uh it's well on underway
it's uh we have a program now called gcp 2.0 it's created by a team that includes people from the
original gcp from institute of noidic sciences from heart math institute and independent people as well
the aspiration is is to have a thousand nodes in a network where each node has a multi rng a poor
poor rng device um and we also intend to be looking at things like social measures
of something like sentiment looking at core potential correlations with meditations that have a heart
focus we'll also look at physical um variables electromagnetic and and more the website for the
gcp 2.0 is gcp2.net for anybody who's interested in having a little uh better look i want to end with a
quote from eminently quotable tayar de chardin someday after mastering the winds the waves the tides
and gravity we shall harness for god the energies of love and then for a second time in the history of
man man will have discovered fire
thank you
thank you roger thank you so much thank you for for ending with this quote i think you've made an
indelible contribution to the field with this project and i'm so glad that global consciousness
project 2 is continuing and and i'm honored to also be part of this and also thank you for showing
us that the effect is there um no matter how you analyze it and there are many ways in which one
can analyze those effects and it's it's a subtle art it's a difficult art of finding deviations in
randomness in true randomness so let's hope more people can jump on these and and help us push it
forward yeah all right so can you unshare your screen
yeah here we go all right thank you roger all right so next we have stefan schwartz i thank
everyone so far because we've been already four hours into the event and we're only 15 minutes
behind the schedule i'm sorry stefan if there was some miscommunication as to the time you were
you were supposed to present i'm glad that you're still here thank you very much for coming and joining
okay well um my name is stefan schwartz and i want to talk about something very specific
as you can see listening to people all day today uh most of parapsychology starts out on the premise of
can we prove that this is real and that didn't interest me because i had when i got involved in 1968
i had spent five years reading the edgar casey readings which is the largest body of
remote viewing information that's ever been recorded and i had previously also at the university
studied uh classical oracles and had read the what is now i realized the first remote viewing actually
objectively verified which was in the 40s is in the 46th chapter of herodotus and i realized that people
have been using accessing what i would call non-local information for thousands of years
so when i got started what i wanted to know was how did it work and could you do anything
of practical utility with it and i'm going to share my screen in a second and i decided that if i was
going to do this and put time into it i'm one of the people that created modern remote viewing actually
there wasn't anybody i started in 68 uh sri didn't even exist yet when i began putting this protocol
together but um i wanted to do something that was so unimpeachably rigorous that um it couldn't be
attacked because as you know most parapsychological research gets attacked so i went around the physicists
all over the country talking to people i talked to two nobel laureates richard fineman and murray
gelman and i said to them if if i do what i'm about to explain to you can you tell me how it could
have been faked or how it what the flaws are and at first of all they didn't believe it was possible
and second of all uh they said well if you really could do that no we can't and um so all of my research
is triple blind precognitive that is objectively verified so let me share my screen and share with
you a specific experiment uh you can go to my website uh stephaneschwartz.com and you can actually
see movies because i make movies of these things too but i'll just lay it out very quickly so this
is what i decided to do i came out of an anthropological uh background and what i at that time
what was really being debated was where to look in archaeology and so that seemed to me to be a perfect
approach because everybody could agree no one knew where the thing was and if somebody could describe
the location and not only that but describe in great detail what would be found at the location
and everything was uh precognized so
in a way that could be objectively verified so let me go through this quickly this is the location of the
brig leander now as i said you can go to my website and see movies of others but here's this is the
brig leander first of all my view because i had been very uh impacted by uh max clunk's interview in 1931
by the observer newspaper in which he said when they asked him what do you know
you and einstein are the two most famous scientists in the world what do you know and his answer was
what i know is that consciousness is causal and fundamental space-time arises from consciousness
not consciousness from space-time and that einstein when asked did he agree with planck said i do it's
because what we call reality is an optical delusion not a illusion but delusion so in any case there are
three variables that i decided that you could do you could strengthen the information you could improve
the sensor that is the viewer i saw it principally as a kind of engineering problem you could use multiple
sensors to do consensus and low a priori analysis so uh to improve the richness you could use more
numinous targets and i thought in archaeology either very famous sites i found cleopatra's palace
mark mark anthony's palace the lighthouse of pharaohs one of the seven wonders of the ancient world but
when you begin when i thought of this what i thought is we have an information phenomena
and that things which have been the focus the target of of much focus uh will be easier to see
than things which are nobody ever paid any attention to and i determined that that was true because i did
remote viewing studies in which one target was shark to cathedral and the other
was a french warehouse of the same physical size and people uniformly could see the cathedral better
i could improve the sensor that is i could do the interview better uh i could do it in a way that
they were not experiencing other sensory stimulation and i could eliminate analytical and sensory distractions
and use multiple sensors so this became known as the mobius consensus protocol i got the idea because i had
been in government at a senior level and had held a lot of clearances and i knew that the intelligence
work just like journalism when you want to find out what's going on you ask multiple people and what
you're looking for is consensus and low a priori probability things so this is the data gathering pre-field
work phase this is hella hammond and myself a number of years ago and you'll notice that she's looking at
a map in which we cannot hear you now i think you froze stefan yes you can't hear me
no i could hear fun can you i can hear i can hear yes i can hear perfectly okay
so you you'll notice her map the colors and the place names have all been removed it's just i make them
into blueprints and the question is no matter how big the site is here's an example of this the brigley
ender this is the search area it was 1500 square kilometers we're looking for an area that's uh about
the size of your garage maybe a little smaller now what's happening no okay so you can i send out the
master map and i ask each individual gets a blank map and then we bring them back and put them on a light
table and we what we're looking for is consensus and here's an example where you can see each mark
represents one viewer and where they overlap you have a consensus zone and you pick the consensus
zone which has the most detail to it and this is an example of that earlier map so wait a minute
and you get them to draw and describe the things in detail that they're going to find there
and here's what it looks like this the r means respondent that's what i call the viewers and so
in this case on that particular site you see lots of wood stacked like logs not so many layers
i see a ship big wooden structure big wood like railroad ties that sort of thing and you notice the
you notice that there's a consensus consensus consensus agreement of what it is they're describing
there's lots of wood and then we break this down each concept gets we evaluate so if you take a sentence
where there's lots of wood stacked like logs that's that's going to be five concepts
and then you go to the next one and so in that way you get very very refined uh agreements consensus and
you notice low a priori probability here's an example that it's a ship that the ship is a sailing vessel
it's a big wooden structure that it's made out of wood and there's lots of wood and it's stacked up
like railroad ties and that this is a wooden so you develop a set of hypotheses that are going to
guide your field work and you can see there a list of the sort of things that they would describe
then you take all of that information and you notarize it and you turn it over to an independent
third person and in that way you establish a completely unimpeachable chronology so then you
go to the field work here's my ship the the research vessel sea view prior to carrying out the field work
we do the second phase of this and that is i do a electronic survey done by independent experts of the
area that has been picked by the remote viewing to see if it would be possible for someone using any
kind of electronic surveillance to locate the same thing that the independent remote viewers have
described which was previous location was previously unknown so i in this case i use lamont geologic
laboratory and here they are getting ready to go out and do their electronic survey
the sea views magnetometer never produced a reading that would have predicted the presence of the ship
and this is true by the way i've done about 16 of these things i have never been able to locate the
site using electronic survey so even though this was done very meticulously
it didn't turn up the magnetometer or the side scan sonar produce nothing
and here actually is the site as it was originally located by us and you can see why nobody can find
it people been looking for this ship for over a century uh they didn't know where it was they knew the
ship but they didn't know where it went down and here's what it looked like and as you can see it's
there's nothing and it's about two or three feet under the sand so we begin removing the sand here we are
removing it and you can already see the railroad ties that they described i have independent archaeologists
who in this case uh a man named peter throckmorton who didn't believe a word of it didn't think we could
do this didn't think it was possible read all the material before we went to see and said i don't believe any
of this and yet as he discovered it was all correct so when you look at the generic criticism well if you
have to say it's a ship then you expect to hear things like anchors and whatever because ships all
have anchors but you're looking because you get these thousands of little bitty details you get
specific things that you just couldn't predict lo a priori so here's the ship big wood pieces like
railroad ties there you can see them that by the way was michael crichton who was a famous author who was
one of my remote viewers and you get predictions like small glass bottles and you never see small glass
bottles that would rarely survive but they described these little bottles about two inches wide
a two inches long filled with a red powder and in fact it was a doctor's medicine vial found in a
wooden a little wooden chest about as big as a toaster and they described pewter i don't know what kind but
it's corroded metal and all of that um that were found these are the actual artifacts so here how accurate
does this sack actually get and the answer is it gets about it we we typically see between 78 to 92 percent
judged by independent experts who are given all of the data these are other people not involved with me
and they evaluate every concept and they rate it as correct partially correct incorrect can't be
evaluated now not being able to be evaluated doesn't mean it's wrong it just means you can't
evaluate it i mean for instance if they said as the ship sank the captain was thinking of his
as his children well unless he made a record of it there's no way you could ever know
but as you can see when you deduct the uh can't be evaluated you get uh uh this rating so then you know
what about just the the location of the ship itself what's the probability of that i mean what kind of
statistical analysis can you get so there are three ways to determine it there's the chance occurrence
i just happen to luck out the location of the site only in reference to that consensus on z
that place that we packed the location of the site in reference to the entire license area
the location of the site in reference to the entire grand bahama banks i had been asked by the
bahamian government to do a survey of the grand bahama banks and to look for certain specific
things that's why we're doing this so no matter what which case you select one begins by recognizing
approximately 300 wrecks were known to have gone down and not just in the license area
but across the entire bahama banks from 1500 to 1876 as determined by a thorough search of historical
records and archival material in britain spain and us i hired three archivists in those three countries to
go through because that's where all the shipping was to go through everything and see if they could find
something that was not presently known to the bahamian government so the most conservative and
obviously artificial position assume all 300 of those wrecks were within that one little consensus zone
the search area is as you can see a tiny fraction of the total search area so the brig site is 5 000 square feet
which is you know you can see the number and it's within consensus zone z you could have put 65 000
sites of this of this size could have been placed in that consensus zone in addition
to the cells and i got this idea originally from creating a grid with 144 squares and burying things
in individual squares of this grid in my back garden that i laid out with yellow rope and discovered that
people could describe it no matter where i buried it so the chances of this being discovered by chance
are extremely small and so the less conservative more realistic analysis is that the wrecks would be evenly
distributed throughout the entire license area that we would expect to see 11.81 as you can see 6.12 boats in
consensus c zone so the probability of finding this at random is p equals 0.0009 which means that the probability
of someone in los angeles or another person in italy or another person in canada as was the case
getting those maps and locating the location down to literally inches and describing in detail
hundreds of of concepts is it's just improbable and i have used this also in criminological cases
and to find queen elizabeth's racehorse that was stolen shargar and all sorts of things to to locate
saddam who's where saddam hussein was hiding so this is a practical application
not to prove that it exists but to do something that was a practical utility and as i say you can go to
my website stephaneschwartz.com and you can watch movies of the discovery of the uh uh cleopatra and mark anthony
and uh uh lighthouse that sort of thing and or you can see another shipwreck discovered off the coast of
california this uh uh information or this research by the way also proved that uh what is going on is not
electromagnetic in nature so thank you thank you so much stephen like fascinating fascinating work
truly pioneering thank you so much stephen for your for your patience and being towards the end and
sharing all this truly pioneering work about remote viewing all right and finally george williams
last but really not least i'm so happy you're here and you'll be the closing speaker of tonight
the floor is yours thank you alex it's a great honor to be here and i'm so so so enjoyable to see
all these faces it's been a long time since i've seen many of these faces and i'm seeing many for the
first time um i'm i work for the federal government maybe not very much longer given the crazy chaos that's
unfolding um at the fcc i'm an economist and uh but in but i've carved a little uh i've carved some some
time to pursue um looking at psi and i uh particularly you know the philosophy of the of psi philosophy that
psi maybe um you know maybe um implies and so um i want to talk about it's sort of a some work i'm doing
which is sort of a um sort of a theory so anyway what i want to talk about is sort of a theoretical uh
framework um for that might incorporate that might be able to support the data that we think of as
psi and uh what i what i'm what i'm hoping to do is sort of integrate um this this uh theory that
actually is very influential in in the field of consciousness called integrated information theory
but i think it has some problems but i think we can perhaps try to address those problems in a way
that will um that will basically um be supportive of a of a sort of a different view that might support
the psi uh psi literature so the the by integrated information theory is sort of a a very influential
uh theory it's a very sort of mathematical formal theory that aims to explain consciousness through a
kind of mathematical notion of integration um and uh what i hope to do is try to sort of introduce
sort of a um some quantum mechanics that will sort of um provide some sort of more foundation for it
okay so um integrated information theory was developed by giulio tonini and many of his colleagues
to explain consciousness through a notion of integrated um information um and iit's framework begins with
these sort of these sort of axioms that are actually rooted in phenomenology and then it creates
postulates that can be applied to physical systems and they actually come up with a kind of formal
measure of consciousness and uh so basically at its core the idea is that a system um that is
more than the sum of its parts has zero integrated information so what do i mean by that is think of
a brain and the in the neurons and all the different um all the different neurons and how they're
connected with one another and if there's so if if there's a a very great degree of integration so that
it's so that we have maybe something like a holistic kind of um system then we have a very integrated
system and iit's claim is that systems that have um zero integrated information is conscious and this
seems to correspond with some of the basic findings in neuroanatomy where you have highly integrated areas
of the brain appear to be associated with consciousness and i'm not really going to go into a lot of the
different literature i just i just want to kind of like summarize it um and i know and i again i
apologize you can't see my my slides but i will i will try to you know um just go go over it um each one
one so so the the the the i the iit's axioms um include things like intrinsic existence composition
differentiation integration exclusion um but maybe the the what i usually sort of think about it
is uh is that um you you you you when we're when we're conscious when we're experiencing consciousness
we see different things we see colors we we hear noises so there's there's definitely a differentiation
of information but there's also the sense that it's all integrated uh that there it's it's it's it's not
like we're we're hearing something and it's just a completely different thing as we're seeing blue
we we generally have a very rich experience that has all kinds of different things that the senses
are are are are telling us but it's all integrated together so then um tanuni and his colleagues uh
provide a very rich framework to try to quantify them okay now there are a lot of uh there there are a
a number of criticisms of iit um ed kelly who was here before um i think gate gives a very good um
criticism in um in in in in in recent paper um it's it's it's argued that iit actually suggests that
non-conscious systems such as a sophisticated system of logic gates might be conscious which is
counterintuitive we we usually might think of consciousness be associated with biological
organisms um and i and and my main sort of argument or my main thing that i want focus on is that iit
relies on a sort of pure sort of structure or mathematical approach that lacks a kind of that lacks um
what um philosophers of mine call sort of an intrinsic intrinsic property um and that is it or in other
words it sort of fails to address the hard problem now um so the hard problem basically is we can sort of
know all the sort of facts about something or the structure or we can equations and so forth but it
seems like consciousness conscious experience seems to be something that can't really be purely explained
in terms in terms of structure so one um one philosophical argument that's been very influential
has been due to russell um bertrand the philosopher bertrand russell and russell argued that science
describes the world with sort of structural or mathematical descriptions that seem to leave out
um um the the sort of the deeper or the intrinsic aspect whatever um whatever is sort of at the core
nature the essence of something and russell also reasoned that this intrinsic nature could be consciousness
itself if so the most sort of fundamental aspect of the world could be conscious consciousness so
while our science gives us a rich understanding of the mathematical behavior of the world it doesn't give
us whatever the essence of the world it doesn't tell us it tells us what matter does doesn't tell us what
matter is so the question is what is matter when we really get down to the the most fundamental aspects not
what it does but what it what it truly is and russell gave arguments that suggest that perhaps it's
consciousness so so so what we might do is we might think about supplementing this very elegant framework
of iit with something what what sort of ground it in some way with sort of an intrinsic nature and what
i want to argue is the right intrinsic nature might be what we might think of as a quantum ground so
um philosophers ishmael and schaffer um proposed that the known the non-local correlations or the
entanglement of quantum mechanics seems to indicate the presence of an ontologically prior ground you know
something that's really fundamental to our spatial our spatial temporal order and this quantum ground
holistically coordinates the probabilities within the wave function in a way that escapes structural
descriptions now because it isn't captured in the quantum formalism that is the mathematics and because
it exists at the world's most fundamental level we arguably could consider it as an indeed the world's intrinsic
aspect but given russell's argument this intrinsic this intrinsic aspect of the world if it is the quantum
ground would be um perhaps a source of conscious experience so what we sort of have then perhaps if this
reasoning is correct is sort of a non-local aware ground of unmanifest potentiality that is
something that's sort of beyond or ontologically prior to the particles that constitute our world
is sort of a deeper field or ground and in order to be consistent with the wave function it also has to exist
in what we might call fundamentally integrated high dimensional space
so if this reasoning is correct then we might think of iat as a kind of filter in other words
so it's it then the the thing is is that it and its integrated and high dimensional nature
makes it an appropriate ground for iit there's there's a sense that it it has the properties
to fit in this highly integrated high dimensional fundamental space and this suggests a filter
interpretation of iit that is to say the brain structure induces conscious experience from a deeper
fundamental ground of awareness and of course this ground is non-local and so the brain doesn't
generate consciousness in this view um though the structure that the brain has does act as a kind of
filter extracting um conscious experience presumably um in in virtue of the properties of the biological
structure of the given organism so um so this uh um filter notion of iit aligns with research on anomalous
cognition inside phenomena so um briefly one way we might interpret the um pk um the micro pk data for
example um is that we might be in contact with a deeper ground of consciousness that is quantum in nature
and so therefore intentions or shared um emotions in the case of roger's global consciousness project
have those those sort of intentions or shared attention emotion have a tendency perhaps to influence
um this uh we can sort of influence quantum processes um due to our the fact that our consciousness is
ultimately rooted in this deeper ground of this deeper quantum ground and um so this is i think
consistent with various um mind body interactions um that dean raden has has has studied with the uh in
conjunct in context of the double slit environment and other other kinds of uh random number generators
but this sort of approach does suggest a kind of quantum view of the brain in contrast to the um a lot of
the other approaches of iat which basically suggests that anything can be conscious as long as it
has the the mathematical properties that iat says that a conscious system should have and so that also
then that raises the question of where in the brain can we find quantum processes and i think many of
you are probably aware that hammer off is is uh actually a very different quantum interpretation but
focuses on the microtubules in the brain so i think that uh i think that that suggests a very uh promising
area to look and so uh i can probably wrap this up um by just saying that i think this approach to
integrating information um theory could offer a novel approach to consciousness by sort of integrating
this notion of upon brown proposed by um shaffer and ishmael and also has some similarities with
david bohm's notion of a of a deeper ground and sort of bringing that into um bringing that into this
um this this framework of iit and this of course suggests that the consciousness is not generated
um by the brain but is accessed um by the brain by accessing a deeper ground and but further research
is needed to explore quantum biology and neuroscience links i should also point out too that i i don't
think that this framework currently um easily explains i i think that ed kelly earlier was talking
about the default um network in the brain in terms of in terms of a filter in the brain and i think
that might be sort of a that might be introduced perhaps as another layer um at some point i don't
have anything right now um to sort of um in terms of uh in terms of adding to that to that framework but
that's basically my presentation so thank you i just want to say thank you very much for your patience and
everyone for um for uh um bearing with me and bearing and and staying with us all this time
totally thank you george and it's really good to end with this effort this proposal to integrate
integrated information theory um quantum biology maybe quantum neuroscience bringing it in all together
with psi anomalous experiences and the the filter hypothesis of of the brain so yeah there's work to
be done but it's interesting to draw from different current um theories and see if they can be made work
to work together so hello everybody my name is peter bancell and i'm a researcher in paris at the
institute metapsychic international and also a fellow at the ions institute for noetic sciences and what
i'd like to talk to you today about is a project that we've been working on for some years that's
called the side home project and so i bring up some slides so i can show you about that
um there we go okay um so the side home project just in a in a nutshell it's a platform for doing
saw experiments and in particular it allows us to work with different cohorts so that the people who
are members of the cohort can run their sessions at home on their own computers on their own time
whenever they are available and in this way that they can participate in multiple experiments
so the motivation behind this is um by looking at a number of problems that face that we always face
in site research and to see if we can come up with some solutions for that so one of it one of the
problems is simply that the effects are hard to get they're not reproducible in any easy way and also
experiments if you're working in laboratory experiments are hard to manage both of these
difficulties numbers one and two have to do with the fact that we're working with complex systems
called human beings okay so getting people together logistically in the laboratory is tough but also the
the effects are tough to to pin down another problem that we all know is that because science marginalized
with respect to mainstream science it's hard to attract new talent into the field and we desperately need
more and clever people to help us with these problems and the last point that i'll talk at about
at the end of this presentation it has to do with data and how important it is and and also challenging
it is to get the kind of data that you need in order to answer questions that we want to pose to what's
happening with some so kind of the solution for this is just a wish list that is not very uh imaginative
but it's very straightforward and what we would like to do is create uh experiments that are reliable
fast very flexible meaning that we can um adapt them to different experimental questions and also
transferable and what i mean by transferable is that the experiments can be done by other people in
other laboratories and and hopefully people who are outside of the field of science research so
in order to try and um solve this problem or to satisfy our wish wish list um the side home project
tries to take on all of these problems all at once and the the basic idea is that we have uh sort of
off the shelf available to us all of the elements that we need in order to put together a psi experiment so
this is there are basically three parts to any experiment that we're concerned about and one is
that there's some tests some side tasks that participants in this experiment are going to do
and then there are the participants themselves which i'm calling cohorts and then lastly of course there
are the experimenters so the approach that we take is kind of a modular approach to setting up this
experimental platform so we have a psi task and psi task here is basically a piece of software
that people can download onto their computer it's connected to the cloud and they can use this
to run experimental sessions that will generate data that is that is recorded in the database that we
have at a distance in uh in in the cloud the next part is the cohorts and by running these experiments
at home on people's own computers we have access to people anywhere in the world so it's possible to build
cohorts groups of people who are highly highly selected okay so this is an advantage for addressing
questions of what kind of personal experiment experiences or lifestyles or orientations experiences
whatever might be side conducive when you're studying particular psych tasks and the cohorts also which
is really central to the whole project cohorts are ongoing so it's we don't build a cohort just for one
experiment but we build a cohort so that they can be collaborators who are sort of on call for our
experiments and the last thing of course is there is an experimenter but the idea here in this modular
approach is that our platform can be available to any experimenters that want to work with us so if
we have cohorts and sci software side tasks that are available we can invite third-party experimenters
experimenters maybe other side researchers maybe people who are outside of the field to come and try out
the experiment so that's the way that the thing is set up um i just want to make a little bit of an
evidence emphasis on the cohorts themselves and some of the virtues of working in this way so the cohorts
like i said they're ongoing right so we we develop pools of people and these people are uh on call for
experiments and they're autonomous they have software that is already on their computer so that when we
want to run an experiment we merely have to contact them ask them if they would like to participate and
then we're set to go the cohorts can also be highly selective so for example i'm working with a cohort of
meditators and these are meditators who have been who have a daily practice that typically has been ongoing
for something like 30 or 40 years those people are not very easy to find they're spread all over the
world but i have access to them because of the side home structure another thing that's really important
is that we develop a personal relationship with everybody in the cohort so there's kind of a
familiarity there's a trust and there's a sense of collaboration that get that gets instilled in the
cohorts and lastly obviously if we're working with people in on an ongoing basis we're building
personal databases and there there are many very interesting sort of longitudinal studies that you
can imagine if you have people that are contributing data over a long time so that's that's sort of the
way we have these three different pieces and in order to manage experiments and manage the cohorts
we've developed some infrastructure that can do it so there's a nice website for example where we can
do outreach contact people who might be interested in joining a cohort and then afterwards manage them
so the back end of the website can take care of scheduling zoom calls if we want to do that or emails
and things like that so there's a whole infrastructure for managing this we ran the first side home
experiment about a year and a half ago and we got so i'm going to gloss over it and show you the good
parts here but there was a very very strong result that we got and there was also some other results
that we don't understand yet but it seems to be working in terms of at least provoking a
side effect and most importantly we were able to do these experiments in a single month so it took us a
month or two in order to establish the cohorts but after the cohorts were were set up and we went to run a
formal experiment the whole thing was done with very little effort in about a month and that is
exactly what we were looking for so we were very encouraged by that
so i want to now shift to one other long-term goal of this experiment which is a little bit
less obvious and that is um that we can use this platform not that not experiment but this platform
to generate databases that are particularly uh adapted to answering really tough questions in
sci research a lot of sci um experiments generate data that shows that there is some anomaly but as
far as understanding and interpreting the data there are a lot of ambiguity so we all know this right so
just to name a few the source of sci we never know it could be the participants it could be the
experimenter so that there's that's a very difficult question to resolve another question that has been
with us since really the the um the beginning of rng micro pk research but even before that uh is the
question of whether an effect is due to receptive or active side that is are you seeing a pk effect on a
micro level or are you seeing some clairvoyance data selection kind of effect that's giving you
an anomalous distribution in the data that you've accumulated so that's also very difficult to sort out
another question that comes up again is if we're running lots of people and we're getting an effect
is this due to many people people contributing a little bit or just a few people who are gifted it's a
a little bit easier to sort out but it's an important question and it's not always obvious
and another very very deeply um interesting question is whether the psi effects that we see are
causal in a conventional sense or whether they are goal oriented that means they're sort of telec
right they depend on what you want is what you get so so we know that both of these seem to be
options there's evidence for both but it's difficult to sort those out and i want to just give two
examples of uh where these kinds of ambiguities have been resolved because the data structure allowed it
okay so the first one is a very simple one straightforward easy to understand and it's the
pair benchmark experiment this is the the rng pk experiment that was done in pair lab over 12 years they
had 100 subjects they um ran a tripolar protocol in front of an rng and they got a very strong four
sigma effect after about a decade of research and it turned out that this effect was generated entirely
by two subjects so it was a perfect demonstration of a gifted sort of pair a gifted subject paradigm
um unfortunately pair actually i don't mysteriously pair somehow missed this uh in some of their their
reports they elude to this but um the way they presented their data and also um the way that they
presented and designed the replication of their experiment uh with a consortium of laboratories in europe
totally ignored the fact that they had a database that was generated uh with an effect coming from just
two people not the hundred people who were so that was so that's um the misinterpretation of those data
had really actually serious consequences later down the road but it was possible to sort it out
because of the way the data structures was that there were individual databases so you could go and see
who were the the gifted subjects and statistically it was so obvious you don't you didn't even have to
do an analysis you could just look at the data and you could see oh the whole thing is coming from just
two people so that's one example of where the data structure allows you to resolve an ambiguity that is
what is present in in a psi experiment another one that's much more subtle and and and um much more
difficult to sort out is the famous gcp experiment so this is an experiment where they hypothesize that a
global consciousness can affect random number generators that are spread out in a network
around the world basically the hypothesis is that rngs are consciousness detectors and when a lot of
people have a lot of people have an eclectic emotion that's going to change the distribution of
outputs of the rngs and you can look at the rng output and you can see that and correlate deviations
in the data with big things that happen in the world that create emotional reactions by large numbers of
people okay so they did this over almost 20 years 500 events that they looked at they got a huge effect
seven sigma and the the um the upshot of it is that although that seems to confirm the hypothesis it is
you know they predicted that there would be data fluctuations during these events and therefore that
that would be evidence for global consciousness that was incorrect okay and in order to see how it's
incorrect you actually have to do more analysis so the analysis that they did do gave some con
confirming support to their hypothesis but they never investigated um competing hypotheses the main
major one being is that the way the experiment was run there was freedom of choice for every single
experimental test and therefore an avenue open to experimenter psi clairvoyant choice of parameters
and in fact that's what ha that's what happened but the way to determine that was by using the intricate
data structure that just by luck and good fortune the gcp had in place so it's it's actually quite um
um extremely complicated to go through all the details but the big picture is really easy to see
so here's a picture of the that the gcp usually shows which is the cumulative effect of all of these
events adding up to a huge z score of about seven now any individual event will is very very noisy and looks
something like this and if you spread it out in time so an event might take place over a couple of hours
you see there's a little bit of a bump in the middle but if you integrate it you can see the
trend and that's what i show in this plot here um and so this is what you would expect now one thing
you can do with the data to look inside the events is to integrate it in this way so this is not an
accumulation of events one after the other but this is now if you were to add events all on top of each
other and look at their the time evolution over the course of the event from the start till the end
and if you do that this is what you see you see basically the same thing that you have here
and that's the seven sigma effect however when you spread it out in time like this over the time
course of the event it allows you to look a little bit further in the data and here's the virtue
of the gcp database is that you have access not only to the actual data associated with the events but
you also have access to the data just before and you have access to the data just after the events
and if you look at that you see that there there is an opposite effect that is of exactly the same
magnitude of the effect that the gc gcp events give you so you're seeing that just the proximate data
before and after the event is giving an effect of equal and opposite sign and that's the sign of a
clairvoyant selection effect and i won't go into the um the details anymore because it's actually a long
story and you can make a much stronger case than just this picture i i show you here but the picture
is you know it's it's very striking you really see that there's something much much more going on
than just simply this event story and and global consciousness so the upshot of of that is that by
looking into the structure of the data you can resolve this question of is it a goal-oriented effect
some kind of clairvoyant experimenter effect or actually global consciousness and in this case we
we know we know now that it's it's not global consciousness it's good it's a goal-oriented effect
so the the wish list for experiments with the side home project includes now instead of events
being instead of experiments just being reliable for fast flexible and transferable to people
in our field or outside our field we also want to be able to design data structures that can give
insightful sort of you know penetrating uh answers to ambiguous questions that we face in uh
psy research so that's um the side home project and i thank you for your attention
hi everyone uh welcome thank you for being here thank you alex for coordinating this beautiful
event um and inviting me to present um i just to introduce me quickly uh my name is cedric canard
i have a phd in neuroscience i've worked at the institute of noetic sciences for seven years and
worked both on the mainstream topics like mental health and wearable technologies and advanced brainwave
analysis methods and um developing tools for computing entropy in the brain and uh interactions between
the heart and the brain and all that and then i've worked at ions as well on various topics like full
trans channeling um mind matter experiments and precognition and all that telepathy um but my main
topic of interest that i want to talk about today is precognition or presentiments so the ability to
pick up for the body uh consciously or not consciously to pick up information from the future
um and lead to anticipation uh as measured by various sensors throughout the decades uh like skin
conductance that mainly reflect the sympathetic nervous system or arousal uh like stress fight or flight
response so if we present a stressor in the future we see this deviation uh that preceded in the in the
presence or past depending on how you look at it um and um so we've looked at it through so many
different ways over the decades i mean not me but other um amazing researchers and um so through pupil
dilation heart rate um eda gsr skin conductance um eeg brain waves uh the electric fields of the brain
brain basically and um so if we look at the big meta analysis in this uh topic so meta analysis if
you don't are familiar with it and i apologize if other presenters have already talked about this um
but uh so roughly the context in in the research the the status is that this big meta analysis look at
all the papers there are publications and studies that have been done over decades and run statistics on
them to help us understand what is the conclusion from these hundreds of studies or 50 studies and
basically we see small to medium effect sizes um but um replicable basically effects so there's something
going on um it's not super strong but it's there and that goes in line with i mean that doesn't really
even go in line with the experiences of people because people have these life-changing experiences
out there all the time you probably every single person um here probably know someone where we have
these gut feelings in the real world or this like dream that something's going to happen and it happens
and there's no way to explain it with our current uh understandings in the west of reality
and um so science has been trying to study these things in the laboratory putting all these sensors and
you know they don't happen at will so uh we have to use stimuli so in images for example that elicit an
emotion positive or negative emotion and we compare it to a neutral image that doesn't elicit an emotion and
we do this 200 times in a black dark room on a screen and uh to isolate the noise and try to to capture
really just this little experience um that happens in the body um subconsciously and uh and then there's
studies that look at it you know consciously where you have to guess what is the image that's going to come in the future
and we look at success rate and error rate and uh we generally observe performance above chance
and uh for the subconscious approach we observe these deviations in the physiology just before
something happens and um there's no way we would explain that normally um in scientific ways because
there's no cue that leads to what is happening so uh and and we often vary the the period before uh the
next stimulus randomly so it's pretty much impossible to predict when the next stimulus is coming
um in our understand understood ways um so yeah there's just uh a few limitations that have been
there and addressed by some papers like the filter method which without trying to wasn't without getting
too much in detail uh for example for brain waves analysis for eeg for the brain that is so sensitive and
you know the neurons it's like millions of neurons that fire together to get into a coherence and
synchrony to for us to see a rhythm um and that is in microvolts and the noise from the environment or
the noise from the muscles creates much greater activity so we generally use signal processing methods to
remove the noise and we filter the sorry we filter the noise and methods to remove the artifacts from
the muscles um and uh the most common filter used out there um apply is applied to the signal forward
and backward in time so it may smear the the post stimulus the response of the brain it might kind of
smear it in the in the past and that could have explained some of the effects but some studies
have used cause what's called causal filter that address this limitation then we have um other
limitations um that could explain the effect in in conventional ways uh such as for example um expectation
effects so uh you probably may maybe you've heard of the gambler fralty effect where if you're at the
casino or you flip a coin and it's heads three times in a row it's pretty logical and reasonable to
expect the next one to be tail right because you had three heads in a row but in reality the probability
is always 50 percent but it's possible that there is similar effects in the brain in experiments where we
use randomly positive negative images it's all perfectly random but by chance you have sometimes
three times in a row a neutral image for example and the brain has learned over trials because we do
two hundreds of them to get good response in the brain the brain is learning as you do the experiments
it's like okay there is three conditions there's pleasant and pleasant neutral and they seem to be
appearing from time to time and the brain just can't help it it's just always trying to predict what's
coming that's what it does it's called predictive uh processes and uh it's now one of the dominant
theory of consciousness in the mainstream world um and so if you have three negative images in a row the
brain is like okay it's very likely it's going to be uh sorry if if it's for example it doesn't matter
but if it's a neutral image three times in a row the brain is going to expect okay it's going to be an
emotional image probably soon and um or it's been negative three times in a row it's probably going
to be a positive one um in any case uh some studies study uh control for that some don't so it's hard to
navigate what is what is what is what is true what is not uh and in this literature it's very complex
effects are small hard to replicate um one other one is uh the period between the trials uh where
um you know for example there's uh beautiful studies that for example by mento and coli uh mental by
himself uh 2015 called the passive cnv the contingent negative variation showing that the brain um even
if you modify the period between the the trials uh the brain is learning this the the most likely period
between two trials and so there's a build up of anticipation this uh negative variation um that builds
up in frontal central areas in the brain so the brain learns for example okay 75 of trials are uh three
seconds long some are a little shorter a little longer doesn't matter i'm gonna predict the next
trial is gonna be at three seconds right because it's the most likely so the anticipation peaks at that
moment and so maybe pre sentiment effects are just the result of that um but so uh long story short i did
a big analysis recently um on 80 individuals so sample size also a limitation often uh it's hard to get
you know funding to get big groups of people you need the time you need the money to pay them
you need the time to analyze the data and publish the results all that uh anyways i had the opportunity
to do this analysis on uh 80 individuals and the 18 participants um of only female to remove some
other biases and uh 64 electrode eeg control for all these potential limitations and still saw a beautiful
little effect i don't know where i say beautiful but uh this little effect um uh 160 milliseconds before
the stimulus happens and uh i control for these potential limitations and um to take it for a little
further um i did a dipole fitting so we kind of identify which uh region is um involved uh trying to
understand the mechanism so uh just wanted to talk a little bit about um that for example
there's always these battles out there about theories of consciousness is it fundamental
is it uh reductionist is it a result of of matter and evolution and just cells coming together and
consciousness emerges or or fundamental uh consciousness then it's
everything we see is the result of consciousness manifesting a reality with uh a lot of different
theories in the middle and uh in my mind it doesn't matter that's more of a kind of an opinion
and what matters is the data and we should be able to understand what's going on uh whatever the
reality is we have these bodies right now and um we see these effects in our bodies um so no matter where
consciousness located or originating we should be able to understand at least what's going on
in between right um in in through the body and um so i think i just want to make a a little point about
um academia and fundamental research that i think is so important to try to really use the best tools
we can to understand those those phenomena um what are the processes involved um what what is our brain
area that's really consistently involved for example and then we would really learn a lot about what it
means uh for us um but then the the other point is about how we have been studying these things uh in
so unrealistic conditions right we put people in the lab in a dark room because there's so much noise
right we wanted the best signal possible and we cannot measure people's brains while they're in their
daily lives at least not yet maybe with neural implants soon uh that may be possible if people are
willing to do that but um not right now so people are just staring at a screen and there's these images
that are appearing and they have elicit little emotions in the subconscious but it's not like you're
fighting for your life right in the real world when those things really happen in general
and uh we have evolved for surviving right survival reproduction is the main thing for millions of years
as uh single cells multi-cells organisms um you name it so um what i've i got a grant uh uh at ions um
uh not long ago that was about using virtual reality uh to try to create an environment that's a little more
natural uh i'm suspecting that if we can simulate things that are more a little closer to the to the real world
so people are in virtual reality so it's very immersive uh i don't know if any of you have done the the plank uh demo uh
uh that was from the i think oculus several years ago where you go in an elevator and the doors open
and there's just one plank and you're on the skyscraper and then it's just uh you know a lot of height
and you have to walk on this plank and then you eventually fall and i personally well as i was falling
and saw the ground coming i almost fell in my real body when i hit the ground because it's so convincing
for the brain right uh so the point is what if we try to do experiments in virtual reality where it
seems like there's a real threat or a real thing happening and potentially psi or those effects might
be more natural and stronger right and i could explain why the effect sizes are so small it's hard
to replicate and all that because there's a meaning right there's an evolution that adaptive uh reason for
those abilities if we have them it's for survival it's for you know detecting those things in the
real world um and then the other thing is uh we've been studying this thing uh looking at the body and
the brain uh in very separate um system as separate systems and the the heart and the brain are different
so um the part of the grant is also not only doing immersive virtual reality but also
uh getting these very expensive new headsets so most of the grant went into purchasing that headset
uh to capture all of them so the brain the heart uh the skin conductance and um the pupil and all that
and the idea is uh what if so the eeg of course is less sensors right um because it's hard to build those systems with that many electrodes so there's only 12 of them but um the idea is it can be a lot of the
um but um the idea is can we combine all these modalities all these different senses right like
if you're in the real world you're not just trying to see the lion calm you're trying to
use we use our smells and haptic uh you know if there's an earthquake you can feel vibrations coming
and it's like straight right away or flight mode um our heart rate starts kicking in and all that so
um the idea of this project is okay we're going to do a driving simulation like uh there was one study
that did that uh by uh duma and patricio trisoldi in 2017 uh called driving with intuition and um so that
was on the computers and now we're trying we're trying to do this in in virtual reality um and
basically yeah if we look at all the different systems in the body at once um in this much more
immersive natural scenario are we going to see stronger responses uh because now the car you can
see it coming uh you don't know if it's going to crash or not and when it does there's the visuals and
there's the sound and i really wanted to have the vibrations in the microcontrollers too but
uh didn't have the budget for that unfortunately maybe next next time um but uh so we're actually
currently recruiting this is happening at the institute of knowledge sciences if you want to
participate that'd be great if you're in the area um we're looking for a large sample because this
headset allows us to collect good data much more easily as well it's another advantage so we can
increase the sample size by reducing the time of data collection and hopefully that can give us some
strong insights also on inter-individual differences some papers suggest like all meditators seem to have
stronger presentiment activity uh some papers say maybe women have more some etc it's unclear and i think
the key is really to have much larger groups to answer those questions so uh there's that and um uh let's see
what else i think i'm missing something um yeah uh the other the other um addition we'll add in this project
and hopefully in the future too is um to use machine learning i think now we have enough uh traditional
studies that suggest these effects are real they're not that strong but they're there and replicable and
kind of pretty replicable despite the limitations um but um it's definitely not enough to convince
people you know and most people don't understand statistics and all that it's very complex so what i
want to do is train machine learning models and try to classify based on the signal in real time
so we're measuring your brain your heart and all that and in real time um we can print the goal is to
predict okay the car is going to crash just based on the physiology so that would be i think the ultimate
uh validation uh validation just like uh einstein or predictions of black holes uh for decades uh they
were there we had the formulas it was all great but you never know until you get a picture and it matches
the prediction right so i think this is the the ultimate uh goal and uh not only then we know for sure
but we also have a tool that allows us to actually predict its coming like an accident or something
and that could become uh a real application that could help people's lives um i'm this is a very
optimistic far-reached uh goal but who knows when the technology is going you know it goes so fast
um so yeah that's that's pretty much it and uh then there's so this is at the individual level and also
i'm really interested in global consciousness and a member of global consciousness project
gcp 2.0 and where i also want to apply a similar approach uh on the data uh so if you're not aware
of what that is uh we have random number generators and are hosted in various places in the world um
emitting random numbers uh constantly and um when big events occur like people if
a lot of like new year's eve or big meditation uh events where a lot of people are focusing their
attention on the same thing we see the devices start producing numbers that are not random anymore
um kind of the analogy with uh the collapse of the wave function in quantum physics where
uh all the different states of possibilities collapse into one when everyone's focusing on the same thing
um and so in a similar manner we observe this deviation that starts just before those events
uh happened uh like new year's eve for example uh like didn't didn't really uh recent studies show show
that uh so i'm also really interested in in in that aspect of precognition presentiment and the global
consciousness area and um yeah try to apply the same methods of can we predict something's coming
um and that would be the ultimate uh validation i think but research and academia is also very
important and um uh understanding more fundamental um things about mechanisms is also very important
so yeah i hope that was helpful um
let's see how long was i okay uh thank you everyone and uh i hope you had a great uh event
hey everyone i am sorry i couldn't make that for the original event but i'm submitting this recording
so i could be included and see all the other recordings um i heard great things about the event so
hopefully this will be two par uh let's see i'm going to share my screen
yes there we go and i will try to full screen it here
there we go okay great so i decided to put together with this little 15 minute segment
um some highlights of talks from late 2024 to early 2025 so just the last few months and it's about my
efforts to try to nourish a revolution in our understanding of time which is sort of my life
mission you know in a sense i think if you include love in there love and time it would be truly my life
mission but um also something that i've been participating in as a student for a long time
and now as a uh continued student who sometimes teaches but always from a place of frank not knowing
so we'll we'll go through three different talks but two from uh december 2024 early january 2025 from
the advanced manufacturing and space economy interagency working group that my friend
anna brady estevez put together and then well the other one is august of 2024 so not the last few
months convergent aeronautic solutions which is a really innovative group at nasa um and i'm not
giving all the slides just sort of what feels uh appropriate to this venue so this is a the the
advanced manufacturing and space economy economy interagency uh dr anna brady estevez at sba
and national science foundation on the space portfolio really put this together with with
kevin engelbert from from nasa and the international space station so a really interesting group of
people focused on uh both disclosure and um but not for the sake of disclosure really disclosure for the
sake of how can we build amazing technologies that support our country and so it's very uh very focused on
edge science and deep tech i won't speak for them but i think it's a really interesting group of people
um so i was able to talk about exceptional human performance and specifically precognition which is
sort of my bailiwick slash um maybe intense obsession
to try to understand the experience of uh knowing about either consciously or unconsciously future events
that then end up happening and how to test that and so this is just a brief summary for those
from that from that talk um i think it's really important to tell people in the in the lay audience
field that what we're doing it when we're trying to test precognition is we have some kind of an
experience it could be pressing buttons experience it could be sleeping and having a dream experience it
could be a physiological experience with you know eg cap or fmri um but there's some kind of an experience
that's recorded during the time of the experience or right after the experience and then there's a
period of delay between milliseconds and you know could be years but most experiments between milliseconds
and hours um there's a randomization when we're doing a controlled experiment in the lab of potential
future stimuli and then the randomization picks the stimuli so the random number will be used to
picks it picks it picks from the stimulus set from the stimuli to produce a stimulus in this case
a moon and then either humans or now have been working with ai to independently score
the similarity between what was recorded during this time and what was presented randomly as the
stimulus these are the non-presented stimuli that are sort of in the background and there could
always be some kind of a relationship there so basically for more reviews and relevant papers you
can go to this link and if you have a copy of the slides you can just click on that or you can just
write it down so just two results that were seemingly relevant to the space world that i was
talking with um one is that the self-selected online precognition test performance times and accuracy
and photon absorption i know these are very different things i'll explain in a second both show
variation with moon phase so this is something that uh published in 2024 in the journal of anomalous and
exceptional experience and there's an upcoming correction to this watch out for that but the basic same
pattern remains the same so you can see that in the third quarter and a little bit here but in this
third quarter mostly not only these two colors are presenting the results of different data batches
this line is chance there's more accuracy here in the third quarter both in this first data batch and
the second data batch these are thousands of trials so people are more accurate and they are more
they are sorry they are more likely to perform the task itself when they are more accurate which is
interesting um that that is the same time of the moon cycle throughout these years similar situation
here is under review at entropy that um the the moon seems to be related the changes in the moon
you know so i'm just doing this without talking to people i feel like i stumble on my words more when
there's not people over there listening it's funny there's a little bit less pressure so anyway that's
interesting someone should study that um but but it but the photon counts that were before a random
number decision so i was kind of repeating the same kind of experiment here as a precognition
experiment with photons they are varying highly statistically in a just a statistical significant
variation continuous variation with the lunar cycle it's not because for instance you might think
there's going to be more photons when there's a full moon right there's it's just lighter and so
somehow the equipment's picking up even though it's you know in a basement and hidden away
from the moon that's not the case because look there's this valley here just like there is for
the new moon and the peak is here waning gibbous and first quarter those are the peaks so there's
something going on here where the moon is seemingly influencing people's desire to do this precognition
task and their accuracy and also seemingly influencing photon absorption is there a relationship between these
things um i think this is interesting because we know there are gravitational and geomagnetic effects
on bosonic particles there kind of have to be sort of small changes in space time small changes and
uh geomagnetic fields um that could affect those but it's just the first time i think that's been
demonstrated and these there's parallel effects on human exceptional performance make me think that what
one could do in space is synchronize astronaut intuition sessions like i imagine in the future
astronauts will be gathering to figure out how to solve particular problems and using their intuition to
do it and you could synchronize those with gravitation and or bosonic or geomagnetic levels in order to get at
the peak waning crescent period of the lunar cycle so solving problems at the right time that was became very
interesting to me um the point of this section of slides is to take that precognition stuff and to
bring it into the world of operational precognitive remote viewing so that's essentially intentionally
gathering intelligence from the future by using unconditional love as a booster of your capacity
to perform a precognitive remote viewing task and what i'm showing here with this little animation
is that when you think about time as a landscape sort of everything sort of in a more physical sense
kind of like the block world of space time uh or the block universe but i kind of like calling it a
block world because there could be many of them um that there's it's almost like our attention goes
through time there's the moon landing 9 11 there's covid there's the future of flying cards our attention
or our awareness goes through time in this linear way but that's the only thing that's doing that
everything else is already there in this landscape and so if that's the case then one should be able to
receive information that leaks back or that is affected by the future and you could call it leaking
back in time which i think is a little bit easier to grasp than being affected by something in the
future but um it's that's all kind of perception i'm not even sure that those kind of things matter
in a physical sense but what i wanted to say here is the reason i bring in unconditional love which is an
essential part of operational precognitive remote viewing is that my data suggests that it supports
precognitive remote viewing so this is just uh these are two studies uh this this is from one study with
35 people doing a two different types of suggestions once for unconditional love once for precognition the
precognition suggestion did not help them with precognition at all there was a lot of a lot of performance
anxiety um unconditional love actually seemed to help before the suggestion which i think is hilariously
precognitive in other words people were significantly better than chance and significantly better than
after before they got the unconditional love suggestion and here if you actually take do a median split
on the unconditional love feelings prior to the unconditional love suggestion so you take this
bar and you split it into people who uh had high feelings of unconditional love on a validated
assessment of unconditional love versus a low feelings of unconditional love the folks who had
higher feelings of unconditional love were not only significantly better than chance on a precognitive
remote viewing task but also significantly better than the folks with low precognition love
i mean low feelings of unconditional love so i replicated this with uh thanks to the
be all foundation with mark mccutzi and with kirsten cameron in a paper published in 2024
you can find here and then here are some recog papers with reviews
so in the group intuitive forecasting which you could find here
online we have used this method using unconditional love and precognitive remote viewing to work with
some very complex questions so we've inspired some technical innovations in climate science we've
worked with an agency working on strategic questions in cryptography we've directed
research and development in quantum optics we've assessed novel approaches in uap detection
and we've supported insight into battery design for energy uh an energy company so
that's the kind of thing you could do with unconditional love and these capacities to
perceive future details of things um and then so those are my sorry those are my interagency working
group group slides and now we'll be going into the nasa slides which were presented by a company
called ecosystemic futures nasa has hired to shoshin works which is also run by shoshin works nasa has
hired the ecosystemic futures shoshin works folks to bring a lot of new ideas to nasa so these are
slides from those talks and this is ursula leguin's uh way of thinking about time it's similar to a
landscape we think that time passes and flows past us but what if it is we who move forward from past to
future always discovering the new it would be a little like reading a book the book is all there
all it wants between its covers but if you want to read the story and understand it you must begin
with the first page and go forward always in order so the universe would be a very great book and we
would all be very small readers awesome so this part is about uh my photon experiments which are very
similar to precognition experiments uh but i ended up discovering something called which i called causally
ambiguous duration sorting so briefly to describe that the absorption of photons seems to depend on the
future randomly selected duration of the experiment which is the duration of how long the light bulb will
be on and the thing that detects the photons how long that will be on so that's the duration sorting
it's causally ambiguous because um it's in the future so there's this random select truly random
selection of how long this duration will be on and it's in the future so that's causally ambiguous because
you don't know if past is causing the future if it's a correlation whatever so i'm just going with
the term causally ambiguous there so the effect has been replicated many times by me but also two other
labs and most recently for a year uh long continuous experiments in a lab at uc berkeley um it seems
scale free with respect to time so it's looking like it's occurring in the seconds or minutes or hours
time frame i haven't looked past hours um and it looks like time is woven so this is my conclusion
of this this is a paper is in prep but i mean sorry in under review but it looks like time is woven into
the fabric of the universe in like an all-at-once fashion like like if you could like if you were on a
loom if you imagine a loom with the uh with the sort of threads of events going through like this we
imagine it developing over time but it's almost like the loom creates it all at once um and then
we witness it more like those threads so i'm just gonna instead of going into the data which are you know
soon to be coming out um i and i have one paper on that existing which i'll lead to later but
i just want to talk about what can be done with this kind of thing so i think interplanetary
signaling and real time are potentially pre-time so you don't have to wait eight minutes to talk to
mars uh potentially before or at the same time a message is being sent you might be able to receive it
um i think that the quantum computing speed up that many countries around the world are chasing
could in fact be uh imitated or could be explained by this cad's phenomenon so that's interesting to
think about uh in the informational time travel sense and then in terms of using quantum sensing
to navigate the future i think that's um to me the most interesting idea if it can actually work to
navigate the future by using quantum sensors based on this idea to and maybe and not maybe
probably other ideas to um tap into potential future events and then navigate the best course of
action i think is exciting so thank you all for listening uh lots of folks listed here and and
more who've who've contributed oh dean raden's not listed here i should uh i should point out that he
helped me with my very first entry into precognition but also into uh being he let me use his double slit
optical optical optical system to do my first cads experiment it's my most recent preprint that's
under review that's based on the uc berkeley year-long replication the original cads white paper lay
audience article about informational time travel talk by winthrop williams about the effect that he found
and which is related it's a replication of that effect the first effect um and then quantum time
machines 2022 conference if you're interested it's in the past but as we all know you could just go
visit it so anyway thanks for being here and what a what a great thing that alex has done so i'm very
appreciative of that bringing all this together thank you it's been really great to have you here
i have this feeling of um gratitude and also respect for our field even more after this marathon
uh excitement as well and let's continue let's continue talking about these things thinking
deeply doing science on them and yeah let's make this this lovely human science great again i wish you a
good night and stay tuned for our upcoming events at the paris center bye bye
