The shock is so great in quantum mechanics that we still have not figured out how to really process it.
How does quantum mechanics confront our view of reality, even shattering it?
Amanda Gefter, science writer and author of Trespassing on Einstein's Lawn,
dismantles long-held notions about quantum mechanics,
proposing a revolutionary perspective where observers don't just perceive reality,
they actively participate in its creation.
In this episode, we'll delve into how our beliefs shape the quantum world,
why Descartes' subject-object split is fundamentally flawed,
and how emergence could redefine our scientific understanding.
Prepare to have your concept of reality transformed as we venture into the quantum realm,
where nothing is quite as it seems.
Probably the most formative conversation that I had, even though it was a very, very brief conversation,
was one with the physicist John Wheeler.
So Wheeler was this legendary American physicist who came up with the terms black hole and wormhole,
and he did revolutionary work in everything, general relativity, nuclear physics, quantum mechanics,
and had a very, sort of, profound philosophical mind, but also spoke in this very enigmatic, Yoda-like way.
And I had the chance to meet him, well, this is a whole long story,
but my father and I snuck into a physics conference that was being held in Wheeler's honor.
It was in honor of his 90th birthday at Princeton, and this is in 2002, I believe.
And it was this amazing conference, and all the, you know, best physicists were up there giving talks and everything,
and Wheeler was just sort of sitting at the front, and, you know, he was 90 at this point,
and he was a bit hard of hearing, but he was still deeply obsessed with all of these big questions about,
you know, how come existence, and why the quantum,
and all of the questions that I think you, Kurt, are interested in.
And so, you know, at some point after the talks,
we kind of waited our turn, and we got to go up and talk to him,
and Wheeler had had this idea that somehow observers are implicated in reality,
in the nature of reality.
And the question that I really wanted to ask him was,
if observers create reality, where do the observers come from?
So I asked him this, we had to repeat it a few times, because he was a bit hard of hearing,
and then he said,
the universe is a self-excited circuit.
Okay.
And then we said, okay, and then,
my dad and I were very obsessed with this question about what is nothingness,
and Wheeler had talked a lot about nothingness,
and so our second question was, you know,
does everything come from nothing?
And he said,
the boundary of a boundary is zero.
And we said, okay, thanks,
and we walked away,
and then we were sort of,
what the hell just happened?
Right.
So, Wheeler had basically presented us with these kind of riddles,
and I, in a certain way, have spent much of my career trying to figure out what he meant by those phrases.
So I think that was definitely the shortest, strangest, but most influential conversation that I had.
So what's meant by it's a self-excited circuit and the boundary of a boundary is zero?
How is that at all connected to your question?
So Wheeler passed away in 2008,
but he, throughout his whole career, had kept journals,
these very, very detailed journals,
every conversation he ever had,
every thought he ever had are in these notebooks,
and he donated them all to the American Philosophical Society Library in Philadelphia,
so you can go there and read through all the journals.
So I spent a very, very long time combing through these journals,
trying to figure out what was he really getting at.
And, yeah, so the idea of a self-excited universe,
I mean, in a nutshell,
he had this notion that,
well, first of all, he saw quantum mechanics as giving us a kind of participatory reality,
as he would put it,
where you don't have some reality that's just sitting out there some particular way,
independent of observers,
but observers and the universe sort of come together and participate in the creation of reality,
and reality is sort of ever on the make in this story.
And so he wanted to give a story,
there's a famous diagram he drew that was a U,
the letter U,
with an eyeball at the top.
And this is supposed to capture this idea of a self-excited universe.
So the U is for universe,
and the idea is kind of the universe comes into being
and gives rise to an observer,
and then the observer looks back in time.
This is related to Wheeler's delayed choice experiment.
So the observer looks back in time
and through the act of a quantum measurement
participates in creating the very universe that created the observer.
So it's this kind of strange loop,
and this was his idea of a self-excited universe,
which he never fully was able to flesh out,
but that was the,
he called it like an idea for an idea.
And then the boundary of a boundary is zero.
This is a trickier one.
There's a sense in which it's a,
it's a very basic concept in,
I guess,
topology,
that once you bound a space,
you,
you don't have to put a boundary on the boundary.
The boundary of the boundary is always equal to zero,
which apparently you can actually derive a lot of physics out of this
very sort of tautological statement.
But he wanted to say something a little deeper with it,
like that there are ways,
he called it a principle of austerity,
that there are ways that you can get so much out of so little.
So he,
he,
he was trying to reduce physics essentially to something like the identity of like
zero equals zero,
and then be able to say that you could derive all of physics from this.
I mean,
this was just one program that he worked on that again,
it was an idea for an idea.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean,
it's not that I don't think these were the answers,
but,
but they were very inspiring to me in my thinking and also just sort of
presenting physics as this great mystery that needs to be solved.
John Wheeler,
one of the most influential physicists of the 20th century proposed a
controversial idea that physicists are still debating to this day.
The idea that we live in a participatory universe.
Wheeler said to imagine a cosmic version of the double slit experiment where
light from a distant quasar passes by a gravitationally lensing galaxy.
It can go either to the left or to the right of the galaxy.
Now here's the twist.
We could choose to measure which path the light took,
or we could choose to observe an interference pattern after the light has
already passed the galaxy.
But this choice where we determine if a photon is a so-called particle or a
so-called wave is made billions of years later after the light began its
journey.
This idea is captured in his self-excited diagram where the universe creates
observer participancy,
which in turn creates information,
which creates the universe.
Are we passive observers of a predetermined universe or active participants in
an ever-evolving interdependent web that we call reality?
So the participatory universe is just one of several interpretations of quantum
mechanics.
Can you explain what are these so-called interpretations of quantum mechanics?
And then what is the participatory universe and transition into cubism?
Yeah, so quantum mechanics, it's funny.
I just watched, there's a mathematical physicist, Marcus Appleby,
who gave this talk at Dartmouth College last week, this past week,
who he was comparing our understanding of quantum mechanics to long COVID.
So he was sort of saying that, you know,
there's been all these revolutions in science over the centuries.
And normally it's, you know, Copernicus comes along and, you know,
it says, oh my God, everything you thought was wrong.
And, and there's this initial deep, deep shock,
which is sort of the disease that you have to get over.
But then eventually you just get over it and you, you move on.
And he said quantum mechanics is, is unlike that because, you know,
it's been well over a hundred years and, you know,
and we're still suffering from, from the disease.
He called it long classicality.
Interesting.
So it's the, just the shock is so great in quantum mechanics
that we still have not figured out how to really process it.
And, and because of that,
we have all these different interpretations that try to give
almost a narrative account of what the mathematical formalism
of quantum mechanics is trying to tell us about reality.
And so you have, you know, the many worlds interpretation,
you have objective collapse,
you have relational quantum mechanics,
you have Bohmian mechanics, you have cubism.
So there's all these different interpretations that,
that try to say what it is that quantum mechanics is really telling us.
And they definitely, they, they differ substantially.
I mean,
it's sort of remarkable that you can give such radically different
interpretations of the same theory.
And in a sense, it's,
philosophical temperament.
It's what, what do you want your reality to be?
And then you try to construct a story that's consistent with quantum mechanics.
And the thing about quantum mechanics is it makes it very, very hard to give a consistent
story.
You have to,
I mean,
I think the,
the central lesson is whatever the story is,
it can't be classical physics.
We can't go back.
So something has to give.
And so for instance,
people who like,
you know,
Bohmian mechanics or something,
they,
I would say,
I imagine they would agree,
really want something as close to a classical reality as possible.
So they,
they really want there to be a war,
a freestanding reality that just is some particular way.
And if we have any uncertainty,
it's just because we don't know what the truth is,
but there is a truth out there with a capital T.
And,
but you know,
when you look at what you have to do,
the kind of contortions you have to twist yourself into to say anything that,
I mean,
they're so extreme.
You have to give up on relativity.
You have to allow for,
you know,
crazy non-local effects.
You have to allow for what they call non-contextuality.
You have to,
or sorry,
you have to allow for contextuality.
Um,
what you end up with is still not a classical reality.
It's something incredibly,
incredibly strange.
It's the same with many worlds,
many worlds also kind of has a classical impulse there.
Um,
but the price that you pay is this,
you know,
infinite number of,
of universes where everything that can happen is happening and an infinite
number of you in all these universes.
So,
so the point is these interpretations make it very clear that whatever quantum
reality is,
it's not,
it's not your grandfather's reality.
Uh huh.
What's interesting is he called it long classicality.
So he sees classical,
well,
our adherence to thinking classically as the disease.
Yes.
He doesn't think of quantum mechanics as the disease that needs to be tamed.
No,
no.
I mean,
I think,
and that's,
that's the real spirit of,
of cubism,
which we can talk about is cubism is sort of saying,
okay,
let's,
let's embrace what quantum theory is saying and,
and just get over these kind of classical impulses that we have.
So there's someone named Richard Hamming.
I'm not sure if you know who that person is.
He's a physicist slash engineer,
has a fantastic series on YouTube about learning.
It's from the eighties.
I believe it's just a fantastic watch.
He said that people form their interpretations of quantum mechanics based on their prior metaphysical beliefs.
So he said,
this is true of Einstein and this is true of Bohr.
Christopher Fox had this lecture on cubism and he said that what was different about cubism is that it started with let's take quantum mechanics seriously and then let's see what occurs from there.
Let's let that dictate our interpretation rather than our prior beliefs dictating it.
At least that's what he said,
but that's how most scientists to view their work is they're the rational person who goes in without preconceptions and,
and then I let the data tell me and I am so disjoint from my ego that I'll follow the data wherever it goes.
Okay, so I take that with a grain of salt when he says that, but you know the history much more, so please outline what cubism is and if my reiterating of Christopher's story is apt.
Yeah, well, it's funny.
I mean, to defend him a little, I would just say, I mean, I think he does, he does sort of freely admit a certain philosophical temperament.
So, you know, he talks about really wanting free will, for instance, and, and really in that sense, not wanting a block universe story, you know, where the world just is sitting there deterministically and,
and just sort of is some particular way and, and our actions have no, no real hold on the world.
Um, so I think, I think he would acknowledge some of his sort of philosophical, you know, biases in that, in that sense.
And he also, you know, to connect back to what we were talking about earlier, he studied a bit with Wheeler when Wheeler was at the University of Texas at Austin.
So this is late in Wheeler's career, um, Chris Fuchs was, was there in Texas.
And so I think he was very deeply influenced by Wheeler.
And then also he read a lot of William James and early American pragmatist philosophy and was very influenced by that too.
So I think that's sort of where that's coming from.
Yeah.
So Cubism.
Yeah.
I mean,
Cubism.
So, so yeah, what, what Chris to say is that the name is similar to, to KFC, where it originally stood for Kentucky Fried Chicken.
But at some point they just decided to, it's just KFC.
It doesn't stand for anything.
So Cubism is like that.
It originally stood for quantum Bayesianism, but now it's just Cubism.
Okay.
Well, why don't you start with it historically?
Because why was it called quantum Bayesianism and why did it change?
Yeah.
So quantum mechanics is very much about probabilities, right?
Classical mechanics just gave us values for things.
You know, this is the position.
This is the momentum.
And quantum mechanics gives us probabilities for what we might measure.
And that's part of why it's so strange as a, as a theory, because probabilities sort of
normally are thought of as reflections of some kind of ignorance on the part of the observer.
But these probabilities seem to sort of be fundamental to the world in some way.
And so then the question is, are we talking about the observer?
Are we talking about the world?
And then you get into all these deep questions.
And so how to understand probabilities, you know, there's something called the wave function
in quantum mechanics, which is the most you can say about the state of some quantum system
is encoded in this wave function.
But the wave function just gives you probability, or it gives you a way of getting probabilities
out of it.
And so how to understand probability becomes really essential to how to think about quantum
mechanics.
And so there are different philosophies of probability.
probability.
And so you could say, you know, I think probably the intuitive one that most people have is
what's known as the frequentist interpretation of probability.
So if I say, you know, the odds of a coin flip landing heads is 50%.
What do I really mean by that?
Well, I mean, if I flip the coin an infinite number of times, it would come out to 50-50,
right?
And that's like, philosophically, a really complicated story to defend.
Because first of all, nobody can do anything an infinite number of times.
Second of all, like, why does that tell you anything about what's going to happen the one
time that you do it?
And then also, what's the causal story you're giving about why that probability has any hold
on what the coin actually does?
And so then people talk about like, the coin has a propensity, you know, because it's an
unbiased coin, it has a propensity to do a certain thing.
And then it's like, now you're like, imbuing the world with propensity.
Like, it's just like a whole complicated thing.
As we're talking about probability and wave functions, later,
Amanda will discuss the Born Rule, but a preview is warranted now.
The Born Rule is something you'll hear plenty about in quantum mechanics.
And what it is, is a method from translating from the wave function
two probabilities.
Also, the topological principle of the boundary of a boundary is zero,
has deep-seated connections in physics, and we'll explore that later.
Born proposed that the probability of finding a particle is the absolute square of its wave function.
This forms a bridge between these abstract so-called wave functions and measurable probabilities,
though the rigorous treatment of this involves fancy machinery called projection-valued measures
and density functions. That's for another episode, though.
Now, the boundary principle, where the boundary of a boundary is zero, stems from combinatorics,
so counting principles, in something called homology.
In differential geometry, which is the language of Einstein, this becomes the statement that the
differential of a differential is zero, also known as the Poincaré Lemma.
When applied to general relativity's Riemann curvature tensor, it leads to energy and
momentum conservation in spacetime. In electromagnetism, it gives us Maxwell's equations.
These principles demonstrate how the cosmos speaks an obscure yet simple language.
It's just like a whole complicated thing, and so a very different way of looking at probability is
Bayesian probability, where you just say, I have some prior expectations based on my prior experiences
flipping coins, and then I'm going to, you know, assign a probability, and I'm going to flip the coin,
and then based on the outcome, I'm going to update my prior probabilities for the next round.
And so then, now you can talk about, like, well, if I take that story objectively, then I would say,
the more I learn, the more I act on the world and get consequences of my actions and update my beliefs,
I, like, inch closer and closer to some truth about what the coin really is, right?
Um, and then that's problematic, too. And so then there's a, a variant of Bayesianism called
personalist Bayesianism, which says, I'm never really trying to get to the truth of the capital T,
I'm just trying to make my own beliefs consistent with one another. Um, and, and I'm doing that through
acting on the world and then updating and, but I'm not claiming that my beliefs have some
ontic hold on how, what the world has to do, um, as a result.
And ontic hold just means it's corresponding to some capital T truth out there?
Yeah, either corresponding to or compelling the world to do something. Um, a law of physics would
compel the world to act a certain way or something. Um, so cubism came from a personalist
Bayesian interpretation of probability. So the idea was, let's treat probabilities in quantum
mechanics in this way. And, and that way you don't run afoul of things in no-go theory, like a,
you know, a bell inequality or something like that, where if you really think that, like, basically,
like, if you really want to say my, the probabilities I assign or the uncertainties that I have come from
my own ignorance about the actual state, but the actual state is something. I just may not know what
it is. Um, you know, we can do these experiments, these bell experiments that show you, you get into
trouble if you think about it that way. Um, so. Just a moment. Are you suggesting that quantum,
that cubism, I'm not sure if we're at the point where we've transitioned, but let's just say it's
cubism. Does cubism get over so-called get over bell's theorem or bell's inequality? Does it get
over it somehow? Does it bypass it? Does it give it a different interpretation? Like what does cubism
have to say about bell's theorem? Yeah. So, so the idea of bell's theorem is like
you have multiple assumptions that you put in and those assumptions are like locality
and realism. Okay. In bell's version. And so you say, I'm going to assume the world is local. So
things, there's no spooky action or distance. And I'm going to assume realism, meaning like things have
some state in and of themselves, regardless of measurement, I'm going to assume those things. And
then I'm going to calculate like an upper limit on how distant, um, events might be correlated.
This is how bell like worked it out. Right. So then he says, given those assumptions, there's some upper
limit for those correlations. And then you run the experiment and you see it violates that upper
limit. It's much more strongly correlated than that. And so the world and quantum theory
violate bell inequality. And with that, it's such a complicated way of talking about it. This is how
physicists talk about it, but it's like this weird double negative that's like hard to think about.
But the point is just that the world and quantum theory can't be both local and realist.
Yeah. At least one of those assumptions have to be false.
One of those assumptions has to be false, but it doesn't tell you which one you like,
it's up to you to pick, pick which one you're willing to give up. And this, by the way, gets like
said wrong all the time. And it makes me crazy. It's like one of my pet peeves in science journalism,
because people say like, oh, it proves that the quantum mechanics is non-local. But like,
that's absolutely not true. It's like you could have locality or you could have realism. It just
proves you can't have both. Um, so, so one thing that many people do is say, okay, I'll give up locality.
Um, but then you have a real like problem. I mean, you have to give a story of that,
you know, you end up violating, like you don't have relativity anymore because you don't have
Lorenzo variants anymore and you have a preferred frame. And it's a whole complicated thing where
that nobody's given like a convincing account of what you do if you give up locality in that way.
And then it's like so weird that like the world's non-local, but only a little and only in these
rare circumstances. I don't know that to me, that's like not a, not a convincing story. So
the other option is you say, I'm going to give up realism. I'm going to give up this idea that there
are outcomes that are just determinately sitting out there. And, um, so that's what cubism does.
So cubism, it's not getting around, you know, Bell. It's just the choice that cubism makes is to give up
the realism, not, not the locality. So cubism is still local.
In your book, just to bring it to something that the viewers may want to look up, there's a book
that you have called Trespassing on Einstein's Lawn, and we covered it in the introduction. But
please outline for us in the book, it's a personal quest that you embark on with your father. And I
want you to tell us about this father-daughter dynamic and how that influenced the writing,
especially the writing of physics.
Yeah. So the book tells this story. It's sort of this weird mashup of like a physics book and a
memoir. And, um, it tells the story of like, when I was, um, it starts when I'm like 15 years old.
And, um, my father, who was this very, like, had a very Zen guru. I mean, still does,
has a very Zen guru kind of vibe about him. Um, you know, took me out to dinner at a Chinese
restaurant and, and says, how would you define nothing? And we ended up having this like whole
deep conversation. I mean, I was like this really rebellious kid. I was not taking physics. I was
like in like remedial science. Like I was like failing math. Like, you know, like I was like not
the person you would like talk about physics with for sure. Um, but I think I, I think I always kind
of had like philosophical leanings and I think he sent that and he did as well. And so, um, so he asked
me this question about nothing and we ended up having this whole long conversation. And he had had this
idea that he was very excited about, about how to define nothing. It's usually defined in the
negative. So you would say like, nothing is the absence of everything. Um, and then if you try to
ask a question, like, how do you get something from nothing? You're sort of like foiled from the
beginning because you've defined nothing as like, no something. And so like, how could you ever have
something? So he wanted to define nothing in the positive and say what it is, not what it isn't.
And so he had had this idea that like nothingness is a state of complete sameness that extends
without bound infinitely, that that would be nothing. Um, and so, I mean, this is not physics. This
was just like a, an idea. Um, but we started talking about it and it just triggered this like insane
thing where it was like, well, you know, if the universe came from nothing, like how do, how do scientists
think that that happened? And like, I don't know, let's do a little research and like,
you know, cut to like many, many years later, I'm like still doing the research, but basically
we like just went on this like insane journey that we really like doubled down on of like trying to
understand, teaching ourselves physics and trying to understand, you know, cosmology and, and, and how
physicists think about all of these ideas and then crashing conferences, like I was telling you. And
then I, I had always wanted to be a writer, but at some point I sort of realized, you know, we, I
snuck us into these conferences by claiming to be a, a journalist. And then I was like, oh,
there's actually this field called like science journalism where you can do this. And then,
you know, like when, when we have a question, like we can just ask the physicists, like we don't have to
read popular books to try to find this one little thing we can just like ask somebody. So basically
like little by little, this like fake career that I had invented for myself, like morphed into an actual
career in science journalism. And then, um, and then I, it was the dream. I mean, I got to interview
all of these amazing people. And, and so the book just like tells this whole story, but the physics
part of it is basically we realized early on that, um, that physicists have a way of defining what's
real in like a pretty rigorous way. So I always thought this question of like what's real seemed
kind of vague and philosophical, but, um, you can define something as real in physics if it's invariant in
any reference frame. Um, and so with that definition in mind, we were able to sort of like, you know,
we made this list of like, here are all the things that you, that could be the ingredients of reality.
So like particles, fields, forces, space, time, um, the universe, whatever.
And the we is your father and you.
Yeah. Um, and so we were like in a restaurant, we wrote this on a napkin and then we were like,
okay, we're going to just figure out like each one of these things, is it real or not? And then
we start going through it, you know, and that took us through these amazing ideas and at the cutting
edge of physics and little by little, it was like crossing one after the next off this list and
realizing like none of these things are invariant, but what is invariant is this state of nothingness
that my dad had like started with like that by definition, it's kind of like the ultimate
invariant. And so anyway, so it became, it became this whole, uh, this whole wild journey,
but through it, like I got to really learn some like deep physics. And so I wanted to take the reader,
you know, I didn't feel like I was in this position. Most like popular science books are
like written in this like professor model, you know, where it's like, let me tell you how the world
works. Um, like the readers, the student and the writers, the professor, but it was like,
you know, I had come into this as like this kid who was just like messing around and like sneaking
into conferences. And like, I was in no position to tell anyone, you know, here's how the world is.
So instead I was like, let me just tell you this story of what I did. And like, you can learn the
stuff that I learned with me. Um, so that's how I wrote it.
I remember watching a talk of yours and saying that there are these unconnected facts. When you
first learned physics, plenty of new terminology, it's difficult to make them into a coherent
framework. And then the insight dawned on you or was given to you about what is real is what's
invariant in any reference frame. And then that helped you crystallize and connect different facts.
Yes.
Were there any other insights that helped you see almost all of physics or almost all of
philosophy, perhaps because you have a degree in philosophy, almost all of a certain field was
made much more simple and more easy to be digested because of a single insight.
I mean, that's the one like that, that insight. It sounds so simple, but there's no way I would
have learned the physics. I learned without it because it just, it cuts right through. Like,
I mean, if that's what you're interested, obviously, if what you're interested in is like
engineering something, this is not, this is not the insight for you, but, but if what you're
interested in is like what's real, um, you know, this idea of like what's real is what's invariant.
It just, it's exactly what you said. It like cuts through all the complication and lets you see
what's important. So like, for instance, um, I remember coming across like Stephen Hawking's work,
right? And like, obviously Stephen Hawking was like the most famous physicist since Einstein and,
and everyone's heard of Hawking. If you ask them, like, what did he do that was so important? Like,
people kind of know, like, it might be like something with black holes or, and then it's like,
even if you know, like, okay, he discovered the black holes like radiate. It's like, it's not obvious
why that's such a big deal. All right. Black holes radiate. Like we thought they were black. They're
not really black. Like, yeah. And even if they're not black, they're still mostly black, even if they
do radiate. Right. Exactly. Like for, you know, a long, long millions of years, they're going to be
pretty much, you know, dark, dark, dark brown. Um, but yes, exactly. And it pales in comparison to
the accretion disc, which is around it anyhow. Right. Right. Which exactly. So like, you can imagine
being like, all right, that's cool. But like, with this idea in mind of like, things are real if
they're invariant. When you look at what's really happening in the situation with like Hawking
radiation, these are particles that are being created at the horizon of a black hole. The horizon
of a black hole is not invariant. So if you're outside the black hole, which means you're in like
an accelerated state of motion from a relativity perspective, because you have to like, keep yourself
out. Um, then there's a horizon, it's very real to you. If you fall in, you're an inertial observer,
in like a uniform motion, you just sail right through, there's no horizon, it doesn't exist.
So the horizon is not invariant. And what that means is these particles of Hawking radiation,
which are created by the horizon, are also not invariant. So if you're an accelerated observer outside,
these particles exist, if you're falling in, these particles don't exist. And so all of a sudden,
you have this scenario, which has never happened before Hawking, where particles, which is supposed
to be, like, if you had to pick one ingredient of like, what's everything made of? What is stuff?
Like, what am I? What is this? What, right? It's particles. They're not invariant. So they're not
ultimately real. And we were able to like cross that off the list. And that is a huge deal. It's
just an example of like, being able to look at something that's like this really complicated
physics that you might just be like, oh, all right, that's weird. Um, and be like, oh, I see what's
happening here. And this is a big deal. Yes. So this insight, is it what you would say allowed you
as someone who doesn't have a background in math or physics, when ordinarily you need one of those
to understand high level physics, or ideally both? Is it this insight that which is real is invariant in
any reference frame that helped you? Yes, 100%. So that was a serendipitous insight.
If you were to engineer such an insight to someone who's listening, maybe that insight resonates with
them, maybe it doesn't, but they're looking for such a level of insight. Yeah. How should they go about
getting this piece of information or this different perspective that would align different views and
align different pieces of terminology and help them grasp it? Yeah, that's really interesting. I mean,
you have to figure out what question you're trying to answer. Um, because the question we were trying
to answer is like, what is something, right? We had come up with like this idea of what is nothing,
and now we needed to know what is something, um, which is another way of saying like, what is real?
What's the stuff of the world? And so by giving this definition of something is real if it's
invariant, then we had this way of cutting through all the complicated stuff and just seeing what we
needed to see to answer our questions. So I think if you just have, maybe you have a totally different
question, but whatever the question is, is going to define the thing that you need to look for.
And then that's going to let you cut through because if you're not trying to like do science
as, as a working scientist every day in the lab is trying to like, just do something. If you just like
are trying to ask some kind of philosophical question about like, what does this all mean?
Then the question should steer how you make your way through all the science.
Right, right. So there's this word that keeps coming up, philosophy or philosophers. So many
people see philosophy and physics as distinct. Some people see them as overlapping. And those people
tend to be philosophers of physics, surprise, surprise. So help me understand this amorphous
perimeter between physics and philosophy. How do you see it?
Yeah. So I don't think there's any real difference between the two. And I think the reason it seems
like there's a difference between the two is because, okay, so for the most part, we're all
operating with a philosophy. If you think you're not using philosophy, you're just wrong. I mean,
like- So Neil deGrasse Tyson is wrong. Amanda Gefter said it. Yeah, that's a quote.
Yes. If you think you're not using philosophy, you're probably using bad philosophy. I don't think
I'm the first person that said that, but, um, but I, but I buy it. Um, so like for the most part,
the philosophy that we inherited from like 17th century thinkers, like Galileo, Descartes,
like the start of, that was the start of modern science. It came out of a philosophy. It's like very
specific philosophical ideas that philosophy underlies most of everyday science. Um, and
in most of our everyday lives, which is like where we can use classical physics, that philosophy works
well enough. And so we think it makes it seem like you don't need philosophy. You could do science like
independent of philosophy, but it's just because your philosophy is like good enough that you don't,
that you can like keep it in the background and not think about it. And what happens when you get
to like starting with relativity, but then like even more so in quantum mechanics, you, you find
yourself in these places that are very far from our everyday experience. So like, you know, extreme
gravitational situations, speeds very close to the speed of light or scales that are like,
you know, getting comparable to like a Planck length. Um, at those, in those regimes,
it's not just the physics that breaks down. It's our philosophy that breaks down. That 17th century
philosophy doesn't work anymore. And so all of a sudden you feel like you, oh my God, I have to
confront not only my understanding of physics, but also my philosophical assumptions. And it's the reason
you have to confront both is because they're all mixed up from the beginning. It's just that like,
you were able to pretend that they were separate. So I think, you know, and Bell's theorem, which we
were talking about is like a perfect example. Like that's like a key result in quantum mechanics.
Right. And that led to like, it's not just philosophical. It's like, it led to quantum
computing, quantum cryptography, teleportation, like all these, um, quantum technologies that we
have that came out of, out of work from, from Bell's theorem. But Bell's theorem is a theorem
about realism and locality, which are metaphysical philosophical assumptions that you're making about.
So you're testing your philosophy and finding this philosophical worldview can't hold. And then
like, where do we go from there? Um, so like, is that physics? Well, yeah, because you have to run a
physics experiment, but is it philosophy? Yeah. You're testing metaphysical assumptions. Like,
there's no way to distinguish the two at that level. So I really think that the big takeaway is like,
they're always in combination with one another. And, and honestly, like all the best deepest thinking
physicists, like Einstein and Bohr and Wheeler, they, they, that's how they were thinking. They
were thinking about the philosophy and the physics together, because you can't separate the two. And,
and if you do, then you're just, you're just working under all these assumptions that you're
not acknowledging basically. Okay. So you're just philosophizing with
physics. It's just that you're unaware of it. Yes. I see. Okay. So let's continue philosophizing.
There's, there's a phrase, quantum state, which most people think of as the wave function.
So that's an embedded question to this. You can distinguish the two if you like,
but some people say the quantum state is informational. Some people say the quantum
state is knowledge-based or epistemic is the fancy word, or that it's belief-based or doxastic is the
fancy word, or they'll say that it's metaphysical. Like there's something real that it corresponds to.
So information, knowledge, metaphysical and, and doxastic. So belief-based.
Yeah. What would be the difference between these for quantum states?
Like different interpretation, how different interpretations see that?
Yeah. What is meant when someone says the quantum state is just informational?
Or someone else says, no, you're wrong. The quantum state is epistemic.
No, you're wrong. Quantum state is doxastic. No, you're wrong. It's actually metaphysical.
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, this is, this is like the, the thing that all these different interpretations
like disagree on is exactly like, that's the heart of it is like, how would you understand
the quantum state or a wave function? Um, so like, if I, if I take it to be a metaphysical thing,
like there's actually a wave from like that is, that is, you know, reality is this wave function.
Well, then you're like an Everettian and many worlds person. So the idea is like
the universe just is this quantum state that's like evolving in this Hilbert space, which is,
you know, this mathematical space. And it's just this, you know, vector in Hilbert space. And that's
all there is. Uh huh. So it's a realist view.
It's a realist view. Yes. Yeah. Is that what you said? Realist view.
Yes. Yeah.
Yes. Yeah. So paradoxically enough, even though it sounds the most anti-realist of almost any of
the interpretations, the Everettian, the multiverse from quantum mechanics is a realist interpretations,
interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Yeah. It's a funny, like, yes, that's definitely correct. I mean, it's taking the wave,
this mathematical object to be the real thing. Um, like sort of ironically, that ends up making like
all the stuff that we would normally sort of think of as real in our everyday lives, not real.
Yes. Yes. Like interestingly enough, in the Everettian case, unicorns are real.
So it's just, there would have to be some other universe where-
Some other universe.
Yes. Yeah. Right.
Sure. Sure.
But unicorns are actually real. And so it's quite unintuitive to call it real,
but in the technical sense, it's a realist interpretation.
Yes. Yes. Um, yeah. If I think it is,
I mean, so objective collapse would be another theory that's realist in that way where you would
say the quantum state is a real thing, or at least is a representation of a real thing.
Um, no, I think they would say the quantum state is a real thing. The wave function is a real thing.
Um, but at certain scales, like for whatever reason, either like gravity comes into play,
this is what Penrose would say, or, um, I don't know if there's a certain amount of deco,
I don't know these theories well enough to say, but like at some, for some reason, at some scale,
this thing, which is actually real actually collapses. Um, and then you get some, some
classical outcome in some sense. Um, so that's another way of taking it to be real without being
like ever ready and about it. So if you're never ready and you say it never collapses, it's just like
the wave function is eternal reality.
Great. Now the information people would be who? Some people say the quantum state is just about
information. Maybe it's a subset of knowledge or a subset of belief.
I mean, I think probably Carlo Rovelli's interpretation of, um, like relational quantum
mechanics would be that sort of a thing where you say, I mean, he would say this is also a little
related to, to Everett where quantum states are relative states. Um, so in Everett, like the big wave
function, the ultimate one is real and absolute and invariant. Um, so that's the real thing. Um,
but then there's all these like relative wave functions within that. And so then Rovelli
does away with the big real absolute thing, but just deals in relative. So, so the idea being like,
you and I don't have to have the same wave function for the same object. So I can describe an electron
with a wave function, you could describe an electron with a wave function, but based on
the information that we have about the electron, if we have different information, we can give
different quantum states for that thing. Um, so, so I think that would be a very information
based approach. And this becomes really relevant because there are these paradoxes like the Wigner's
friend paradox. Yes. If you don't mind, can you outline Wigner's friend?
Yeah. So it's this very mind bending paradox where let's say, okay, you're my friend,
Kurt, and you go into a lab and you're going to measure, you have a qubit. So like, you know,
uh, a quantum system that can be in one state or another, and it's an electron that can be spin up or
spin down along some axis. And, um, and you're going to make a measurement and, and say, you know,
the electron spin up or it's been down, but I'm Wigner and I'm standing outside the lab
and the lab is like a completely isolated system. So from my perspective,
quantum mechanics should tell me that you as a physical system and the electron as a physical
system, if you interact, you just become tangled with each other and you just end up
in this big superposition of, uh, Kurt has seen the electron spin up and the electron is spin up.
Plus Kurt has seen the electron has been down and the electron is down and then I can make a
measurement and then I'll find like one of those or the other. Um,
So it's a scaled up version of Schrodinger's cat. It's just, instead of the cat, it's you.
And then you have another friend who's wondering, well, what's going to happen with the superposition?
Yeah. Like the cat's in the box, but then Schrodinger's in a box too.
Okay.
Um, so yeah, it's like these nested measurements and like you, you, what you realize is like the
friend can assign one state to the thing. Like the friend says the electron is spin up. That's
the state. Um, whereas like Wigner is like, no, the electron is still in a superposition of up and
down. And so is the friend. Um, and so then you're like, well, if the quantum state is supposed to like
say what the elect state of the electron is, whose quantum state is right. Cause I have one
and you have one and they're different. Um, so it's sort of points to this fact that you probably
can't treat quantum states as, as not relative. And sometimes, um, as being absolute, like this is
the quantum state of the electron. And so different interpretations have to get around this in
different ways. Um, and so like many worlds, like Everett would just say, well, no worries,
like in one universe, uh, you know, one outcome happens in the other universe, the other outcome
happens and we're always going to end up in the universes where we agree on our things. And so like,
you just sort of sweep all the disagreements into different universes and then it's fine. Um,
but you know, or you could have objective collapse. People would say,
well, a friend is a big macroscopic system. And when they make the measurement, the thing actually
collapses. And so Wigner can't really describe it as being a big superposition because that would just
be wrong. Um, do you have a pet? Yeah. Okay. Let's get to what basically what I was going to ask
is, do you have a favorite interpretation? But maybe you're about to answer that.
I'm sympathetic to, to Ravelli's relational quantum mechanics. Um, but, uh, but cubism,
I think would be my like preferred, um, I don't, you know, as a journalist, like I'm,
I'm supposed to be like neutral. Trying to give this classical third person story of like,
what's really, what's the real state of the electron? I think it's just the wrong question.
Um, and again, it just goes back to these like 17th century philosophical ideas that we have
about what, how reality works. Um, and so I would prefer to, you know, not suffer from long classicality
and just say, you know, the world is, is quantum. And, um, and so I can write down one quantum state
and you can write down another quantum state. So, so what, what cubism says is my, my quantum state
is not a description of the thing. So if we're talking about Schrodinger's cat and I say,
I'm going to write down a quantum state that has the cat in a superposition of dead and alive.
That is not a description in cubism of the cat. That tells me nothing about the state of the cat.
What it tells me is about the state of my various degrees of belief about what might happen when I
interact with the cat. Okay. So it's a very different story. Um, it's not describing the cat,
it's describing my beliefs. And then, but the, but the sort of interesting content comes from the fact
that while I can have whatever beliefs I want, um, my beliefs have to be related to each other in a
consistent way. So it's not completely unconstrained. It's not like, well, I believe anything I want,
you know, what happens in cubism is the born rule, which is this like sort of fundamental rule in, in
quantum mechanics for how normally the born rule is taken to be like how you get probabilities out of the,
the wave function. So like you square the amplitude of the wave function and that gives you the
probability. That's the born rule. Cubism sort of mathematically rewrites the born rule in terms
of just how different probabilities for different measurements you can make on the same system
relate to each other. And this is a really, really interesting move because what it says is like
the difference between quantum mechanics and classical mechanics is in classical mechanics,
I can make, I can measure anything of a system. I can measure its position and its momentum,
no big deal. In quantum mechanics, you can't do that. There are certain measurements you can make
that preclude you from making other measurements at the same time. And, and that ends up being like
really fundamental. That's how you get the uncertainty principle and all this stuff. So, so that's the like
central difference. And, and so because I can make, you know, if I'm Wigner, I can measure,
I can open the lab and then say, Hey, Kurt, what did you get when you measured your electron? That's
one measurement I can make, or I can measure the whole you and the electron in like a superposition
basis and get an interference pattern. And I, and so I can do these different types of measurements,
but I can't do them both. Um, and so my beliefs about what I think I'm going to see when I do one
type of measurement is constrained by how it's related to the beliefs about what I could do
if I take these other measurements. And, and that constraint ends up being in cubism, like sort of
the real content of quantum mechanics. So it's just really interesting because it's a totally different
way of looking at, at the physics. Well, the word belief here must be used in some abstract sense,
because if I was to ask my mom, mom, look, I have a quantum mechanical experiment. It's either going
to be spin up or spin down. What are your beliefs about this? What are the probabilities you're assigning
to this? She's going to cook me food and she's going to think that I've lost my mind. It's a good
mom. Yes, exactly. She'll have no idea what I mean. I said the word quantum mechanics. I, I, she has no
beliefs about that. I said, spin up, spin now. She doesn't know. Maybe she would say 50 50, but that
may just happen to be actually what the probabilities are, but it could be 75 25 or what have you. It could
be 99, whatever. So what is meant when we say, look, the wave function represents our beliefs.
We didn't have any beliefs about wave functions prior to wave functions being invented in the 1900s
and presumably the world was still operating prior to then. So what is meant by the word belief?
Yeah. So what's sort of remarkable is it really just means belief. Um, it does, it means like a
numeric, it's a belief that you can put a number on. So, so, I mean, that's like the bare minimum,
I guess. Um, but it really is your belief. So it, it could be, it could be your mom coming to if she's
willing to put some numbers on it. The thing is, is that the born rule, what she has to do is say,
okay, I believe, you know, I have 90% that this would happen if I did this. I believe 10% that
this would happen if I did this. And I believe 20% this would happen. But then if she plugs all those
beliefs in, the born rule is going to either say, you know, proceed or like stop and rethink.
So if it doesn't fit this equation, it's the born rule is going to say, hang on,
your beliefs are not self-consistent.
So you're not just referring to that. They don't add up to one. You're referring to something else.
It's related to the fact that they don't add up to one, but it's, yeah, they've rewritten it in this
way that they, they have to, yeah. Okay. So the fact that they have to add up to one is like the law
of total probability, right? If the world were classical, that's all, that's, that would be the,
the, the, the whole constraint. You would just need the law of probability, total probability.
The born rule is an addition, a slight addition to the, to the law of total probability. So it's
classical probability theory plus this one extra constraint, which is like an empirical fact that
comes from the fact essentially that like Planck's constant is not zero. So again, it comes from the
fact that our probabilities don't add in the way that they did classically. Like that's what we see
in the double slit experiment. It's like your probabilities, right? There's interference with
the probabilities. Yeah, they interfere. And so Richard Feynman was like, this is the whole mystery
of quantum mechanics. It's like, why do probabilities not add in a classical way? It's, it's similar to
like the whole mystery of relativity is like, why do velocities, velocities not add in a classical way?
So you say, okay, what I have to do to make my beliefs consistent is it has to conform to the
law of total probability plus the born rule. Yes. Now, Amanda, I still don't see how this
helps my mom because my mom will say, okay, okay, Kurt. Okay. So the 65, 25. And I'm like,
mom, that doesn't add to one. We'll normalize it, mom. She's okay. I don't know what that means.
And then she'll just throw out some other numbers. How is she supposed to know if it adds
up to the born rule? How am I supposed to know? It can't be belief means belief.
It does though. It does. Yeah. Okay. Help me through this.
This is the amazing thing about cubism is like, they mean what they say. It really is. Um, so,
so the idea is the born rule is going to say, look, if you, if you were betting,
if you were placing bets, like, think about it, like you're betting on like the outcomes
of all the different types of measurements you can make on this system. You're saying like,
if I choose to measure a position, I'm going to get this. If I choose to measure momentum,
I'm going to get this. And then you're putting like a dollar amount on like each thing that you could do.
If you violate the born rule, it means you've, you've subjected yourself to a sure loss.
No matter what you do, you're going to lose money. So your only goal here is to just not have a sure
loss. You want to just like adjust your bets so that you're not, you're not open to, to just losing
no matter what happens. Um, so, so if your mom like comes up with some numbers and you're like,
hold on, this doesn't fit. You have to, one of these has to be a little lower, let's say.
Okay. And then she can search her soul. This is how Chris always says it. She can search her soul
and make a decision. You know what? I'm going to put more on this one, a little less on this.
She, she tweaks it. That's it. Nothing compels her to believe any particular thing,
but quantum mechanics compels her to make her beliefs coherent with one another.
And, and this is a, you know, they emphasize this in cubism. This is a normative rule. So
this is not an ontological rule. This is not saying like, this is how the world is. It's saying,
this is what you should do as an agent in the world who is trying to bet on the
outcomes of your measurements. And that is the whole story.
Yes. Chris Fox is throwing some holy water. Like quantum mechanics compels you. Quantum mechanics
compels you. Okay. So let's imagine he's doing that to my mom, but it would take two years before
she was to articulate by chance, some set of probabilities that would happen to align with
the born rule. Yet the universe is still moving and trucking along. And presumably at any given
instant, we're making billions of quantum mechanical measurements and observations and so on.
So this is happening under the hood. It's not just physicists in a lab writing it down.
When I'm looking at you, there are many quantum mechanical effects occurring and
this desk here and same with you and same with the people listening. So at no point are the people
who are listening, making beliefs about quantum mechanics consciously. In fact, some of them are
finding out about quantum mechanics right now. Yeah. So help me understand how does a belief,
conscious belief or what we ordinarily colloquially think of as belief have anything to do with a
quantum system. So I think that the question comes from usually seeing quantum states as being like
reality or a description of reality. And then you're saying, well, like, how could reality be my
beliefs, right? But here in cubism, that's not what reality is. Your quantum states are just tools that
agents use to make better gambling decisions about the measurements that they're going to make. And
that's it. I mean, there's a sense in which cubism, they say, like, it's a small theory. Nobody's saying
that's what reality is. They're just saying quantum theory. Everyone is confused by quantum theory
because they think quantum theory is describing reality. And quantum theory is not describing
reality. It's describing how we ought to bet on our measurement outcomes. And if you're not
doing a complicated, like, double-slit experiment or something, you probably don't need to write down a
quantum state and you probably don't need to make these bets. And that doesn't mean the universe is going to
fall apart. It just means you're not doing quantum account. Like, you're not an agent who's gambling on
these things. So, okay, then you could say, well, hold on. Now we've just made this so small that,
like, who cares? But the deeper point is the fact that your beliefs have to be consistent with one
another in this way. Something about that mathematical structure tells you about the
character of the world. So you're not learning about reality from the wave function. That's not
what the wave function is doing. If you want to learn about reality, you say, why should I bet this way?
Why am I bets constrained in this way? That's weird. What kind of world is this such that that would be
the best way to gamble on measurement outcomes? And then that's the road in to asking these kind of,
like, deep ontological questions about reality. But the road in is not to say, like, what does the
wave function, what does it represent? Nothing. It represents our degrees of belief about measurement
outcomes. So cubism, it's the wave function is not describing reality. But that doesn't mean that
it doesn't tell us something very deep about the nature of reality. So when we look at the fact that
we have to organize our bets in this particular way, that's telling us something about the character of
the world. So it's very similar to, like, Chris Bux likes to use this example of the euglena, which I
think is some kind of microscopic organism, the euglena's tail. So you can look at the euglena's tail,
and it's just a feature of the euglena. It's not about the world. But the fact that this is a useful tool
for the euglena to navigate its world tells you something about the world, like, indirectly.
And so the idea is supposed to be the same in cubism, that the fact that the Born rule constrains
our beliefs in this particular way tells us something about the character of the world that
we're having beliefs about. And so what does it tell us? Well, this is something cubism is still
trying to figure out. But the deep point seems to be that it tells us that the world is not divisible
into subject and object in the way that we have thought since Descartes. So it tells us that reality
is participatory in this really deep sense. It tells us that there's not just some way that things are
sitting out there independent of us, but that we and the world together through these concrete
interactions, these measurement interactions, are creating something genuinely novel.
Sometimes the cubists describe it as like there's a spark, you know, there's this novel little bit of
creation, almost like a little big bang every time there's a measurement. And so it's not that,
you know, like, Kurt, when you asked, you know, wasn't the universe just going on, you know,
before we were making bets and writing down these wave functions. So the wave functions are not the
reality. And that, the cubists would say, like, that's the mistake these other interpretations are
making. It's not the reality. But the fact that we should structure our beliefs in this way does tell
us that the reality has this character of subject and object not being like neatly and unambiguously
divisible. So that does tell us something very deep. And then, you know, cubism is hoping to
go on with this kind of ontological project of trying to say more about the nature of that reality.
But it gives this participatory story because you can't say, you know, when you make a measurement,
you can't say that you're revealing something that was already there. You're not finding out what was
already there. You're participating in the creation of that thing. But the key is also,
it's not in you, right? It's in the interaction between you and the world. That's where the novelty
is happening. It's not in the subject. Because again, the subject and object can't be like neatly
divided in this way. And so some people hear about cubism, they say, oh, it's solipsistic because
it's all about beliefs. And it's not just anyone's beliefs, it's my beliefs, right? So if I write down
a wave function, it's my beliefs. And they don't have to be the same as yours. And so people think
that, they hear that, and they think like, because they're so used to thinking the wave function is
like representing reality, it's like, well, then it's only my universe and only your universe. And
like, no, that's not what's happening. That's my beliefs and your beliefs. It's my wave function,
and your wave function. But what arises through measurement is something shared between me and
the world when I make a measurement. And what arises through measurement is something shared
between you and the world when you make a measurement. And then if you and I are interacting
with each other, we're creating something shared together. So there's this participatory story.
And sometimes I like to think about, Wheeler used to tell this anecdote that I love
um, just going back to John Wheeler for a second. So, Wheeler liked to tell this story about playing
a game of 20 questions. So he would, he tells the story that he was at a dinner party, and they were
playing 20 questions. So they would send someone out of the room, and they would decide on like a word,
and the person would come back in and start asking yes or no questions, and they would have to have 20
questions to be able to guess the word. So then it was Wheeler's turn to leave the room,
and he leaves, and when he comes back in, he starts, he said, okay, he leaves, he leaves the room,
and it takes a very long time, it seems, for them to decide on the word. And so then he goes back into
the room, and he starts guessing. He says, you know, is it an animal? And they say, no. And then he says,
okay, is it green? And the next person thinks for a second and says, no. You know, he says, is it white? And the next
person thinks, and they say yes. And this goes on, and he's noticing that the answers are taking longer
and longer each time. And finally he says, is it a cloud? And the person, you know, thinks for a long
time, and then everyone bursts out laughing, they say yes. And it turns out that what the game was,
was when he left the room, they decided that they weren't going to pick a word.
They were just going to answer questions on the fly, but the rule was that whenever they answered a question,
it had, they had to have something in mind that was consistent with all the previous answers, so that if he
like challenged them, they would be able to like come up with a word that this thing could be.
So, for Wheeler, this like was the, like a perfect example of what happens in quantum mechanics, because
the point is, the word cloud didn't exist before he started asking questions. But he didn't come up
with the idea that it was a cloud, because he was asking questions in response to the answers he was
getting from the people, but they didn't come up with it either, because they would have given different
answers if he had asked different questions. And so the word cloud was this sort of participatory
creation that came about between, you know, the person making the measurement, the person asking
questions of the world, and the world responding in turn. And so it's like, in the end, shared between
all of them. That's super interesting.
Right? So this is Wheeler's idea of like a participatory universe, and this is really the kind of
ontology or the kind of reality that cubism gives you, because you're asking questions about the world,
and yes, you're structuring your wave function in terms of your beliefs and all of that,
but that's not what's happening in the actual measurement. In the actual measurement, you're asking a
question of the world, the world's responding back, and the two of you together are like creating something new.
Um, so that's the real story that like cubism is trying to tell, and the whole thing about beliefs is
just a way of telling that story really, really consistently. Um, and, and I guess the other thing
I should add is, you know, in terms of the Bayesian part of the story, you know, you, yes, it's true that
like your beliefs can be anything you want, as long as they're consistent and according to the board
rule, but they're, they're informed by all your prior experiences. So the whole idea of Bayesian
probability is that you make a measurement, you get an outcome, and then you update your
probabilities that you're going to assign. So you update your beliefs in reaction to what the world
has given you. Um, so, so the interesting thing here is like in terms of solving like the quote-unquote
measurement problem is that like other interpretations, what they would call the collapse of the wave
function, in cubism, it's just an agent updating her beliefs, right? So she gets an outcome, changes
her probabilities. That's, that's it. That's the whole story of like the, the collapse of the wave
function. Um, it's not a big deal because the wave function doesn't refer to reality. But that means that
like your beliefs, even though like you are free to believe whatever you want as long as they fit
together in this way prescribed by the born rule, your beliefs are not subjective in the sense of
being like just, you know, made up in your head because they arise from your whole history of like
prior concrete interactions with the world. And so in some sense, the beliefs already straddle that
subject-object divide because they already incorporate these interactions that, that straddle that divide
themselves. And so, so I think, you know, it's personalist and it's important to say that, but it's
also important to realize that like those beliefs, you know, you're not just like coming up with them in
your head. You're interacting with the world and updating in response to that. And then like the last thing I
should say about, about cubism is, um, it's not just the quantum state assignment that you give to a
system that's personalist, but the outcome is personal too. So again, this like is what helps us
get out of like a Wigner's friend paradox is like you can make a measurement and get an outcome
outcome. And it doesn't mean that outcome is true for me when I'm over here and I'm Wigner. Um,
so outcomes are personal, just like quantum state assignments are personal. And so, um, in cubism,
like to be consistent, you, you end up with all these levels of like personalism. Um, but again,
you don't want to think of it as being in some agent's head. It's not like the world's in your head.
It's you're interacting with the world in a very real way. And the outcome is something shared
between the people participating, participating in that interaction, which is like you and the world
or you and another agent, if you're acting on each other. Um, but anyone who's not in that interaction,
like Wigner standing outside, this is not, you know, an outcome for Wigner. So it's, it's personal in that
sense. Okay. Let's go through a side door with all these different interpretations of quantum mechanics.
There are other foundational issues at the heart of quantum field theory, which is said to be the
deeper theory. Have you heard of some interpretation of quantum mechanics solving any of the foundational
problems in QFT? Any of the interpretations? Yeah. Any of them. I haven't seen any personally,
but I don't know about the relationship between interpretations of quantum mechanics and the
foundational issues of quantum field theory. In QFT, it's almost like you're already telling
a kind of realist story about like what's happening in the world. Cubism wants to just be like
measurement. We're talking about measurement. That has to be the foundation of, of, of anything you're
talking about. So I would think like, well, I don't know. Tell me what you have in mind.
Well, actually one of the interpretations, so Penrose makes some claims about quantum gravity.
So then that has to say something about quantum field theory, but then there are other issues like,
how do we rigorously define the Feynman path integral? Or what about existence of mass gaps
or problems with renormalization? And it doesn't seem to me like interpretations of quantum mechanics
have any bearing here, but it seems like they should to me because quantum mechanics is at the
higher level than quantum field theory. Quantum field theory is more foundational. So we're stuck
up here trying to interpret when we should be over here interpreting. It's like the, the interpretation
is going to set the terms for what you're counting as real, what you're counting as,
it's going to sort of set like the, the really, really fundamental terms in which like any theory
that you talk about in physics then has to apply. Like, so for example, people talk about in quantum
gravity or something like, or not even quantum gravity, like talking about like, like vacuum
fluctuations, let's say. Okay. So you have like, because of uncertainty, you have vacuum fluctuations,
you have pair production of particles and things like, so you can tell this whole story, but really
if you're thinking in like terms of like quantum foundations and interpretations, like what are
those fluctuations fluctuations of, right? Because it's coming out of uncertainty. So it's, is it
fluctuations in your beliefs? Is it fluctuations in your knowledge and information? Is it like,
because if you're saying it's fluctuations of a thing that's just sitting out there fluctuating,
like you're already either like a Bohmian, like you've already picked an interpretation at that
point. Do you know what I mean? Yes. So the cubists would say,
Cubists would say you got to talk about where's your, the agent has to be in the story from the
beginning and what are they measuring and how are they betting on the outcomes of those measurements?
So would the cubists say that your beliefs are actually fluctuating? No. Um, I realized I said that,
but no, um, they, they would say the, the fluctuations come from uncertainty, quantum uncertainty.
And in a cubist story, the uncertainty comes in with the fact that you can't make certain measurements
simultaneously. And I mean, that's, what's happening, right? Like when you get like a vacuum fluctuation in
the standard like story, it's, um, coming about because of this non-commuting nature of like time
and energy, right? So you say, oh, on really, really, really short time scales, you can get these like
huge fluctuations of energy. Um, and so, but what you're really saying, that's like, again, it's like
you're just trying to tell a very realist story at that point. Because what you're really saying is,
if I were to measure the time, I could get this thing. If I were to measure energy, I could get
this thing. And then those are related in this strange quantum non-classical way. But like,
the whole story has to be like, what are you actually going to measure? And, and you can't talk about
like, what some field out there is doing independent of what you're measuring.
Amanda, to get into some less, well, we'll see. It could be less hairy or more hairy ground.
What is your view of consciousness?
Oh boy. That's yeah. That's more hairy. Um,
my view of consciousness is, is related to all of this.
Great.
And let me try to think of the least painful way of explaining it. Um,
to put a name to it, like the, the view that I, I find compelling is, um,
usually called the inactive view or inactivism. Um, and this is in the world of like, what's
sometimes called like 4E cognition. So this is like embodied, embedded, extended, and active.
Um, it's related to ecological psychology as well. So anything that starts with an E, um,
tends to fall in this camp. And, um, and so, yeah, I would, I, of, of the ease, I would,
I would choose inactive. Um, but can I give a historical aside for a second?
Please, please.
Because I find that this really, really helps explain where I'm coming from. Um,
this idea that we have of consciousness was invented in the 17th century.
Oh, okay.
It does not, it was not always with us. And I think that's like a really key thing for
us to remember because it seems like, oh, that's just so intuitive, but it's not. Um,
this was like, and I, this was an invention. Um, and it was invented mostly by, by Descartes.
Um, even though there were like predecessors and like going back to Plato and, and Augustine and
stuff. But Descartes is the one I think we can blame most significantly. And, um,
what you have to remember and what people seem to have forgotten is when Descartes came up at this
idea that the mind is in the head and that there's this sort of first person story,
cogito ergo sum, this whole thing. He was not coming up with this to explain the mind,
which was not yet a problem. He was trying to invent a new theory of physics.
So the physics that existed at the time was Aristotle's physics. And when you look at that,
there was no real subject object distinction. Um, so for instance, like, you know,
we now thanks to Descartes make this distinction between like primary qualities and secondary
qualities. Right. And, um, like subjective objective. So, um, in Aristotle, you know, redness
or sweetness or all these things were not like in our heads. They were just like part of the world,
but also like objects did things because they had like internal motivation. Like things fell
because they like yearn to be close to the earth. Like, so there was objects weren't really objects
and subjects weren't really subject. It was all mixed up. And, and Descartes came along and he had
come up with Cartesian geometry and Cartesian coordinates. And he thought to himself, like,
if everything were just size, shape and motion, if that's all that existed, then I could describe the
whole universe just using my coordinate system. And I would have this new physics. Um, but like,
unfortunately, there's all this other stuff like thoughts and ideas and colors and sounds and like,
and none of that fits that story. So I need somewhere else to put them. And then he has
this realization of like, oh, you know, I, I can doubt everything that I see, but I can't doubt my
doubting. So there's this difference between the things that are like self-knowing and then the things
that are only known. And so he creates this distinction between like the cogito, which is like the self-
self-knowing, self-referential thing, the I, the capital I, I, and, and the objects in the world.
And so then he takes all this subjective stuff that doesn't fit in his coordinate system and he
sticks it in the head. And then he takes everything else that's left is just objective. And so
he writes like the words, Cotito Ergo Sum, like this first appeared in a treatise on physics.
This was a move for physics. And so, and his physics wasn't great, but it, it did displace
Aristotle's very quickly. And then Newton came along and Newton fixed it basically. And it became
Newtonian physics, but Newton's physics would not have existed without Descartes. And, and so it set
the stage for classical physics. And at the same time, and in the same move, it invented this idea of
consciousness as being something self-knowing that we experience directly, but the world we only
experience indirectly and that there's qualia and that there's objects. And those are different.
This whole story that we tell about consciousness came from this one move, which was to say,
I'm going to make a split between subject and object. And so you get from this one single move,
subject and object split, you get consciousness and you get classical physics. And so when quantum
physics comes along and goes, wait a minute, classical physics is wrong. This story doesn't work.
And if you look at like Bohr and you look at like the origins of quantum mechanics, like what they're
realizing is the issue is that subject object distinction. The world cannot be divided up that
way. You can get away with it for so long, but when you look really, really closely,
you get this little h bar, uh, Planck's constant, which tells you this is measuring like a subject
object overlap that you can't get rid of. And, and so all of a sudden that story was wrong
and you need to remove that subject object split. But where we've ended up is in this really confused
place where we kind of see that on the quantum mechanics side, but we're doubling down on the
consciousness side. So we're walking around with this very incoherent metaphysics where we're saying,
okay, yeah, like in quantum mechanics, like objects aren't really just objects, but subjects are still
really subject. Like it just doesn't make sense. Like if you, we need to be like that split was the wrong
move. You can't carve the world up that way. It doesn't work. And so you have to fix the story
you've told on both sides. Yes. And so what fixes it on both sides?
Okay. So from my perspective, cubism fixes it on the physics side and inactivism fixes it.
Ah, and do they play well with one another? Is inactivism somehow interpreted in cubism or vice versa?
So they're doing very different things, but when you really look at what they're doing,
they're both just trying to, like inactivism is trying to understand mind without the subject object
split and cubism is trying to understand the world without the subject object split.
Yes. I see. I see. So Carl Fristen has something called active inference. Is this related?
Sort of, um, I think it depends how you interpret his stuff.
Interesting. There are interpretations of Carl Fristen.
Of his interpretation.
That's another podcast.
Yeah. Right. I mean, I think like the way it's usually talked about is, um,
like he talks about, right, these Markov blankets as being like these, the split, which I think that's
very cool. Um, but then it's like, you're sort of trying to infer, like he usually refers to like
hidden states on the other side. Um, and I think in like these other stories, you wouldn't want to
talk about like hidden, like the world's not hidden to you. Like, I think that idea that, that like I'm
in my head and all I know is my own experiences and the actual reality out there is something hidden
that I have to infer. Like, I think that's already a problematic story. Um, but I think probably you
could talk about free energy without using that kind of language and then maybe it would be fine.
So the solution to not dichotomizing the world into subject and object is what everything is object
or everything is subject or something else?
something else. So I think like, I think that's the problem we've all gotten into is like Descartes
was like, here's the dinner menu. You may have subjects and objects. And then people like are
like, well, wait a minute. Like, this is dualism. I don't want two things. Like, that's crazy.
I will just take subjects or they're like, I will just take objects. But then there's like a few people
that are like, you know what? Maybe these aren't the options. Like, why do I have to pick one of
these things? Like, yes, interesting. So I think that the issue is, I don't think it's it. There's a
reason those are the options, which are like in any perception, you have to make a subject object
distinction in any quantum measurement. You have to make a subject object distinction. But the difference is
you want to say, in a participatory way, I am enacting that distinction as my way of making
a perception or as my way of making a measurement. You don't want to say that distinction is given to
me from the beginning in some like absolute sense. I know I'm speaking very abstractly here, but like,
I think that's like the issue is like, you want to, you don't want to take the subject object
distinction as pre-given and absolute and fixed. So you definitely don't want to say it's all subject,
and you definitely don't want to say it's all object because that's already assuming that
distinction is fixed. You want to say it's, it's movable. And in any given situation,
I can carve it up in different ways. Does that mean you can carve yourself out of
the situation? Can you carve it up in any way in the sense that it's just assigning different
weights to subject and object? So I'm going to think of this situation as 99% subjective, 1% objective.
Or I could think of this situation as entire 99.9% and thus I'm minimizing my own contribution to the
point you could make it 100% objective. I've never thought of it that way,
but I think that sounds right to me in some sense. I mean, you can't take, if you take yourself out of
it entirely, you're, you're dead in some sense, right? So like, you can't do that. Boer loved to
talk about like a blind man with a, a cane, like a stick. Um, and he would say, if the man holds the,
the cane very tightly, he can use it to like touch the world. And in that sense,
the, the cane is part of the man. And so it's on the subject side of the subject object divide,
but he could also hold it very loosely in his hand and like consider it as an object.
And then like, he's not touching the world with it. He's touching the cane. And so now the cane is
on like the object side of the subject object divide. So it's the same cane, but it could be on
either side. So that division is like movable. And, and Boer thought that was really the essence
of quantum mechanics was that that division is not fixed. And in cubism, this becomes important too,
because the cubist says the measuring device is an extension of the agent. Um, so, so the,
the, the line can be drawn, you know, very differently in a given measurement scenario,
depending on like what, how, how I want it to be. Okay. I'm much less confused.
Okay. That's interesting. In the same way that if you start writing, you become accustomed to writing,
the pen is then an extension of you. You don't even think of the pen. You don't think of your
individual fingers on the keyboard. So the keyboard is akin to an extension of you.
Yes. So some people would say, it's not just akin, it is. So John Verbeke may say that,
that's a cognitive science scientist who is also an advocate for 4E cognitive science, by the way.
Exactly. Yeah.
You have just outlined that the cubist view is that in quantum mechanics, we're making
measurements. The measurement device is at that point, an extension of you. Actually,
I'm still confused. So I'm going to get some clarification on that after.
This is how I feel every day. I'm like, I almost, no.
Yeah, exactly. Okay. Well, anyway, Amanda, thank you for spending so much time with me.
I appreciate you taking time out of your day for this. And Amanda, please tell me, what is it that
you're currently working on?
So I'm working on a project that's been 10 years in the making, um, that is related to
all of the things that we're talking about. Um, because it's basically, um,
I was telling you about Wheeler's journals in John Wheeler's journals. I found reference to the
student of his named Peter Putnam, who I had never heard of. And I sort of went down this rabbit hole
of like, who is this guy? Because Wheeler students were all like, you know, it's like Richard Feynman
and Hugh Everett and he's like very famous people. And it was like, who's this Peter Putnam?
And long story short, I found that Putnam was, you know, the student of Wheeler's. He did his PhD in
physics, but then he became very interested in how the mind works and came up with his own theory of
mind. Um, and then he and Wheeler throughout their lives had this like really intense correspondence,
because Wheeler's trying to understand like the nature of quantum mechanics and like what role the
observer plays and like what's an observer. And then Putnam is like working on a theory of the observer
and they're trying to like put these pieces together. Um, and in the meantime, Putnam ends up, um,
moving down south in like rural Louisiana and working as a janitor and living in like total poverty and
writing all these papers, but not publishing any of it. And then he's killed by a drunk
driver in the 1980s. And when he dies, he leaves $40 million to the nature conservancy,
which it turned out he had made in the stock market, but never touched any of it.
Uh huh.
And then his papers, all his stuff ended up like tucked away in this like storage unit.
And so I found all of his unpublished stuff and I've been trying to reconstruct like what was his
theory of mind, which I think is very related to these inactive embodied ideas that we were talking
about and, um, and trying to relate that to Wheeler's participatory, uh, understanding of reality,
which is very related to Qism, which we were talking about and how to piece those stories together.
Amanda, thank you for spending so much time with me.
You're very welcome. I hope I didn't just add to confusion.
Beautiful. It's beautiful. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Firstly, thank you for watching. Thank you for listening. There's now a website,
curtjaimungal.org, and that has a mailing list. The reason being that large platforms like YouTube,
like Patreon, they can disable you for whatever reason, whenever they like. That's just part of
the terms of service. Now a direct mailing list ensures that I have an untrammeled communication
with you. Plus soon I'll be releasing a one page PDF of my top 10 toes. It's not as Quentin Tarantino
as it sounds like. Secondly, if you haven't subscribed or clicked that like button, now is the
time to do so. Why? Because each subscribe, each like helps YouTube push this content to more people
like yourself. Plus it helps out Kurt directly, AKA me. I also found out last year that external links
count plenty toward the algorithm, which means that whenever you share on Twitter, say on Facebook
or even on Reddit, et cetera, it shows YouTube. Hey, people are talking about this content outside
of YouTube, which in turn greatly aids the distribution on YouTube. Thirdly, there's a
remarkably active discord and subreddit for theories of everything where people explicate toes.
They disagree respectfully about theories and build as a community, our own toe links to both are in
the description. Fourthly, you should know this podcast is on iTunes. It's on Spotify. It's on all
of the audio platforms. All you have to do is type in theories of everything and you'll find it.
Personally, I gained from rewatching lectures and podcasts. I also read in the comments that,
hey, toe listeners also gained from replaying. So how about instead you read, listen on those
platforms like iTunes, Spotify, Google podcasts, whichever podcast catcher you use. And finally,
if you'd like to support more conversations like this, more content like this, then do consider
visiting patreon.com slash Kurt J. Mungle and donating with whatever you like. There's also
PayPal. There's also crypto. There's also just joining on YouTube. Again, keep in mind, it's
support from the sponsors and you that allow me to work on toe full time. You also get early access
to ad free episodes, whether it's audio or video. It's audio in the case of Patreon video in the case of
YouTube. For instance, this episode that you're listening to right now was released a few days
earlier. Every dollar helps far more than you think. Either way, your viewership is generosity
enough. Thank you so much.
