This is a conversation between the first physicist who made the explicit link between quantum
mechanics and consciousness, Sir Roger Penrose, and the inventor of the microprocessor, Federico
Faggin, who is also a physicist and has just written a book about his own quantum theory of
consciousness. Why should consciousness even exist if it has no causal power? That's my question.
I would agree that clearly it does exist and I think I would agree with you there. The fact that
it can have a causal effect is the only reason why beings have evolved with it. Roger Penrose and
Federico Faggin agree on one important point when it comes to consciousness. It cannot be computed.
A computer, in the sense that we mean it, which is a computational system, will not ever be intelligent.
Understanding, intelligence, consciousness are words that are often used interchangeably by
Roger Penrose, and according to him they involve quantum mechanics. For more than two decades he's
been working on a theory about quantum effects in micro-tubilee in the human brain that recently
seemed to be substantiated by empirical findings. Federico Faggin in a sense builds on Penrose's
ideas, but not in the way you would think. According to Faggin, consciousness is not caused by wave
function collapse, it's more fundamental. Quantum fields themselves are consciousness. Collapse then is
just consciousness expressing itself. Consciousness and free will must be postulates. It must be a
postulate. In the sense that consciousness and free will cannot be explained in any simpler ways than
the fact that they exist. If you start with consciousness and free will existing, we can then
explain why quantum physics has to have the crazy properties that it has. Here Penrose disagrees, mainly
because he is dissatisfied with quantum theory altogether. According to him it's not a complete
theory because it leaves out an understanding of what wave function collapse actually is.
Well, as Einstein and Schrodinger said about it, it's an incomplete theory. I'm not as polite as
they are. They were saying it's incomplete. I would say it's actually not even quite correct.
What has to go on in the brain,
in the conscious being, what has to be something which is not just evolving according to current
quantum mechanics, it's evolving according to that theory we don't yet have, which is the more
complete theory in which the collapse of the wave function is part of that theory.
As a philosopher-moderator who understands quantum theory, we had Bernardo Kastrup join in,
who stirred things up a bit. Federico and I, and I dare be with Federico on this one,
and not with Sir Roger, I don't think collapse really happens. I think if we eventually get to
a deeper understanding of what's going on, I think we realize that there is no collapse. It's an
epistemic, it's a transition from an epistemic idea to an ontological one.
Sir Roger is raising his hand to his forehead.
I don't see how you can say it doesn't happen. I mean, you have to have something which looks more
or less like the classical world. And if you don't have the collapse of the wave function,
the quantum evolution of the state does not look like the classical world.
In this conversation between Penrose, Vargin and Kastrup, we hit on the mysterious divide between the
quantum and the classical world, and how it relates to consciousness. Penrose, perhaps the oldest and
wisest, made a confession, namely that he once tried to close the quantum classical gap by believing in
the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Is that it's a good thing to have had in certain stage of your life, to have believed in the many
worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. The shorter period, the better. I did go through such
a stage myself, believing in the many worlds interpretation.
Welcome to the Ascensia Foundation's YouTube channel. And before you watch further, may I ask you
to like and subscribe, because it really helps us to produce content like this. And I advise you to
turn on subtitles below for a better viewing experience. Enjoy the conversation.
First of all, a very warm welcome for Sir Roger Penrose, who's joining us from Oxford,
known to be one of the greatest physicists of our time, a Nobel laureate, and someone who has made
huge contributions outside of physics as well, studying consciousness and coming up with a testable
theory about the relationship between quantum mechanics and consciousness. Now we have
Federico Fagin, inventor of the first microprocessor, the touchpad technology and the touch screen
technology, and one of the founding fathers of neural networks, who now also has a theory about the
relationship between quantum mechanics and consciousness. And to me, sort of the catalyst
in meeting both of you gentlemen has been this gentleman here sitting next across the table, Bernardo
Kastrup. And Bernardo, it was through an episode I did on Conscious AI that had you in it, Sir Roger,
with your chessboard position. And Bernardo, you knew Federico, and now we are sitting here,
and I just find that beautiful. And I want to really give the three of you time to get to know
each other. And I think it's good to first start with your theory, Sir Roger. And I previously
interviewed you in 2021. And then in 2022, I followed this news website that said that your colleague
Larios Giosi had come up with experiments that made it very difficult to have your theories still
be credible, because you would say that quantum effects cannot be possible in microtubulus. But
then two months ago, I read in a journal a paper coming out saying that these effects are now
experimentally established. So I thought Sir Roger must now be triumphant that the experiments are
now in favor. So I'm very curious where you now are with your theory.
Well, as far as experiments are concerned, I think one has to be a bit cautious about it all.
So I'm not an expert on experiments. But I certainly have a colleague who,
although the recent experiments you refer to seem to be supportive of the point of view I'm putting
forward, he was a bit skeptical thinking it might be a bit wishful thinking experiments. So I just have
a neutral position on this. I can't really judge the experiments. And exactly how one might make
observations, experimental observations to see whether they, well, the argument would have to be that
one has quantum effects in microtubules, these little tiny parts of cells. And this has been the
argument for quite a long time, ever since I had a communication from Stuart Hameroff. I'd written my
book, The Emperor's New Mind, which was trying to put forward my viewpoint with regard to consciousness.
And at that time I had no idea how you could find anything in the brain which seemed to support what
I was doing. And it was interesting to hear from Stuart Hameroff, who read my book, and his job was
to do with consciousness, namely to turn it off in a reversible way, because he's an anesthesiologist.
He was at the time, he's now retired, at the University of Arizona. And he introduced me to the notion of microtubules,
of which I was completely ignorant previously. I'm not a biologist, I'm not a physiologist,
I don't know the details of what's going on, so I have to trust other people when it comes to that.
But the arguments that I had originally came from mathematical logic. I had attended as a graduate
student three courses that were nothing whatsoever to do with what I should have been doing, which had
to do with pure mathematics, algebraic geometry at the time. And one of the lectures I went to was a
lecture given by a man called Steen on mathematical logic, and he explained how the Gödel theorem worked
and the notion of computability I learned from him too, as a definite thing in mathematics, and that there
are certain mathematical problems which don't have a computable solution. I mean they have a solution of
some sort, but they're not solutions that you can put on a computer. So I was aware that there were
such things, and that what I found most striking about Steen's lectures was when he came to the
Gödel's theorems, and I was a little bit disturbed by the idea of Gödel's theorems, because I'd heard
about them before going to uni, to graduate work, and I wasn't very happy with the idea that it seemed to
show there were things in mathematics you couldn't prove. What I found reassuring was that the actual
argument, the Gödel argument, is to show if you have any system of proofs that you accept as acceptable
proofs, and you could in principle put them on a computer, then what Gödel shows is how you construct
a sentence in a very clever way, which you can see is not provable by those rules. But what struck me
as most remarkable and most reassuring in a way, was that your understanding of why the rules work
enable you to transcend the use of the rules. So it's understanding why the rules work which enables
you to see why the Gödel's theorem is true. You don't see that, you see that it's true but not
derivable by those rules, but it is derivable by your understanding why those rules are actually
correct for the mathematical results.
This also leads, of course, to that chess position that you showed me then, which had to do, right,
with AIs. A halting problem is triggered, so to speak, and the human mind somehow, because it
understands chess can solve the puzzle, whereas AIs will just start computing forever.
Well, yes, but I guess that particular example, probably the computers have grown in power since
then, and it may well be that they could solve that particular problem. But any specific problem
in chess is a computable issue. I think it's nice because we have a founding father of the microprocessor
sitting on the other side of the table. Federico, to share with Sir Roger your view
about why consciousness cannot be computable. Yeah. Well, my ideas start by saying that consciousness
and free will must be postulates. It must be a postulate in the sense that consciousness and free
will cannot be explained in any simpler ways than the fact that they exist. And we have the proof
within ourselves. It can be a subjective proof, but it is a proof within ourselves.
So if we, for a second, then we start there. And by the way, that postulate is self-evident
because we all know that we are conscious and we all know that we have a certain modicum
of free will. So starting there, then together with the professor Giacomo Mauro Tariano, which you may know,
is an expert in information, quantum information, and he is the one that actually showed that if you
start with six postulates that are informational, quantum informational base, you can derive quantum
physics out of them. So with Dariano, we came up with a way of thinking about consciousness
that makes a lot of sense to me. And that is that if you start with consciousness and free will existing,
we can then explain why quantum physics has to have the crazy properties that it has.
Specifically, we can explain why quantum information has to have the no cloning theorem and Olivos theorem,
which we can discuss a little later. And then why the collapse of the wave functions cannot really
exist as such, but it is a expression of a free will decision of a field that is,
that has consciousness and free will. So consciousness and free will are then causing,
in a sense, the physics, which is the informational aspect, not the meaning aspect, not the semantic
aspect, but the informational, the semantic aspect of reality, to manifest the way it does.
So, you know, with this theory then, not only does it make sense to start with a conscience and free will
existing, you know, existing and being true by definition and being fundamental properties of all
the fields or quantum fields, you know, the quantum field of electrons is conscious, is self-knowing, is
within the consciousness itself. And the symbols used to communicate, which must be shareable,
existing in space-time, are the excited states of the fields, which are what we call electrons.
But the electrons then in this idea, in this way of understanding reality, are just the symbolic aspects
of reality, where the semantic aspects of reality are within the field itself.
So, this theory seems to, you know, to then explain, to really show that
our conscious experience, in particular qualia, that is the perceptual way in which we understand
reality, we begin to understand reality, we have the sensations and feelings that allow us to understand
reality that perceptual qualia are represented by quantum information, because quantum information
is private, it cannot be reproduced, no cloning theorem, and also what we can say about, or we can
measure about that state, is only one bit per quantum bit. So, which is exactly what we do,
because what I feel, when I transform what I feel in symbols, in outer symbols, shareable symbols,
classical information, those symbols are, in fact, only, you know, a small portion of what I feel.
The love that I feel within myself, for a sun, for example, it's not a number, and it has dimensions that go
way beyond any, you know, possible measurement. It is, it's a dynamic form, it has depth of perception
that, that I need to understand within myself. So, qualia can be represented by a quantum state,
a pure quantum state. So, anyway, so this is the essence of this theory.
Sir Roger, before I give you an opportunity to reflect on this, because this is, of course, a whole
theory in our, I think, a hundred things to say about this proposal, Federico's making. May I ask
you, Bernardo, you have an understanding of Sir Roger's work and theory, and an understanding of
Federico's. Where do you see the main differences, and what do you think is the good question now for
Sir Roger to reflect on, hearing this new theory of consciousness? Yeah, I can't compare to these two
giants, but I'm looking in from the outside, and I try to make sense of what they have been saying.
Sir Roger, in The Emperor's New Mind, which I think is from 1988, or 89, 88, right? I think.
Yes, I don't think, he's around about that, yes. The key point I think he makes is that
consciousness can jump out of the system. Consciousness is not a formal system. In other words,
a system of axioms and rules of derivation that you can produce theorems out of it. Consciousness can step out,
of that formal system, and acquire a form of insights that cannot be formalized that way.
And that may have something to do with quantum mechanics, because quantum mechanics doesn't seem
to match with Aristotelian logic. So it gives us an opportunity, or a way of thinking, about how
physical systems, or how natural systems, could not be just a formal system. So that's the link there.
It's the jump outside of formal systems that is linked with quantum mechanics in some way.
Federico comes at it, perhaps from the other side, and meets Sir Roger's ideas. Federico says,
things as they are in themselves are conscious states. And our best model of these conscious states,
of things as they are in themselves, is a quantum mechanical description of a quantum state in
Hilbert's space. So his interpretation is that quantum mechanical descriptions of systems in a superposition
are our models of things as they are in themselves. And things as they are in themselves are experiential states.
And what we call physical states, or classical states, after decoherence, or after collapse, whatever
happens actually there, they are symbols, syntactical representations of internal quantum states, which
contain much less information than the internal quantum state. Because a quantum state is a,
you could say, it's an infinite superposition of possible states, while when you make a measurement of
that, you only get one bit per quantum bit, which is much less information in a certain way of
interpreting information. So Federico makes the same link, that it is the known classic classicality,
it is the known, the aspect of a system that isn't just captured in a formal set of rules of derivation
and axioms, that is linked with quantum mechanics. And that touches on Sir Roger's idea as well.
Sir Roger's comes from the opposite side, and I think they may meet in the middle. Maybe it's a
naive perspective, but that's how I interpret them. I think that there is a lot in common. Sir Roger,
I would give you, please give you the opportunity to reflect or maybe ask questions, if there are,
there must be questions, I think, hearing all of this. Well, I think, I'm afraid I'm thinking that I'd have
a very different view from the ones expressed by the other two. I mean, my view certainly is not that
it's quantum mechanics, because quantum mechanics, as we currently understand it, is, well, as Einstein
and Schrodinger said about it, it's an incomplete theory. I'm not as polite as they are. They were
saying it's incomplete. I would say it's actually not even quite correct. And it's not correct, because quantum
mechanics, as it currently exists, does not have a theory of the collapse of a wave function. Now,
you see, you have in standard quantum mechanics, you have the description of the world according
to a thing called the quantum state. The quantum state evolves according to the Schrodinger equation,
which is a deterministic equation, completely computable as well. However, it is not the way that
the world evolves. As long as your system is small, in some technical sense of the word, small,
then it does behave according to the Schrodinger equation. But when the system gets too big,
and I could be more explicit about what I mean by big, when it gets too big, then it doesn't follow the
Schrodinger equation. You have this phenomenon of the collapse of the wave function. And my argument is
that it's not just that quantum mechanics is important for consciousness, quantum mechanics on
its own is not, wouldn't give you consciousness. It's how quantum mechanics has to be extended to a
better theory. As it exists, it does not, would not explain consciousness. Quantum mechanics
follows the Schrodinger equation, and following the Schrodinger equation doesn't give you
what I need. You need something which goes beyond that, which is not computable. And this, the argument
is, has to be in the collapse of the wave function. So I'm arguing it's worse than quantum mechanics,
if you like. I'm saying what has to go on in the brain, in the conscious being, whatever its brain is
like, that has to be something which is not just evolving according to current quantum mechanics,
it's evolving according to that theory we don't yet have, which is the more complete theory,
in which the collapse of the wave function is part of that theory. That needs to be there. And
current quantum mechanics doesn't have a theory of the collapse of the wave function.
Yeah, you're dissatisfied with the theory. But please, please reply, Federico.
Yeah, no, I think, I think, Sir Roger is perfectly fine. In fact, I, I don't think that quantum physics is,
uh, is really complete. Exactly because you cannot tell what causes the collapse of the wave function.
We only know that the, uh, collapse of the wave function involves pure randomness, which is non-algorithmic,
which is the only way that you can explain the behavior, you know, according to the Bell theorem.
It is a long story, but you, you know, that's the characteristics of, uh, of the collapse of the
wave function. And in my theory, actually, we solved that problem. Because by saying that a quantum
field, first of all, we don't start by trying to explain consciousness and free will by quantum
physics. Because we, we believe that consciousness and free will are fundamental. Therefore, they exist
as a postulate. And then because of their existence, we can explain why quantum physics must be the way it
is because it must reflect the existence of the comprehension, quality and comprehension and
meaning that exists in consciousness. And the fact that there is free will, which accounts for the
collapse of the wave function. But I think we touch here, don't we touch and please reflect on this,
Bernardo. Sir Roger, when you, you, you, you, uh, speak about your dissatisfaction and remembers when you,
in our previous interview, you also told me, um, how Schrodinger with his Schrodinger cut,
didn't want to point to what the theory means. You want to point to its absurdity.
Um, and he wanted, of course, and, but then when I write, read sort of the early stuff and the
philosophical thoughts that these founding fathers had, you see, of course, the same discussion.
And what, what I found sort of interesting is that Schrodinger also started saying stuff that
maybe consciousness, uh, uh, is one in the end and there's a unitary field of consciousness,
stuff like that. So we see, I was very curious to ask you that question. Um, because this really
feels, feels as if you're hitting ontology here, isn't quantum theory weird as long as we want to
keep up a sort of an Einsteinian realist worldview of which you are perhaps more in favor of. And then
of course, sitting here is, is our two gentlemen, perhaps a bit more in the other camp. But I want
to let the three of you talk, talk about this. Before, there is one more thing that I want to
say very quickly. Quickly. Okay. No, no, very quickly. It is the point that the, the fact,
if you start with consciousness and free will, the fact, then the quantum information has the same
characteristics of a lived, of an inner experience. That fact is, is allows you to then, uh, to then
say that the collapse of the wave function can be a, the result of a free will decision because free
will without consciousness would not make any sense. You see, it is exactly because you can explain
consciousness that you can then explain the collapse of the wave function as a free will decision.
Yeah. Let's see. Very clear. Very different from my point of view.
Do you see? Yeah. Yeah. I'm curious, curious on your thoughts, Roger.
Yes. Well, you see,
I would say the collapse of the wave function is a physical process, which is a long way away
from explaining consciousness. And the physical process is something one can get towards. I have
arguments, which I put forward quite a long time ago, to show that the two great theories of 20th
century physics, or the two great contributions, revolutions in quantum, in physics, were A, quantum
mechanics, which came first, and B, Einstein's general theory of relativity. And what I'm saying is
that those two theories have an incompatibility. Quantum mechanics is based on the theory
or the basic principle of superposition. You can have a particle in one location, that's one quantum state,
or it could be another location, that's another quantum state. And according to the basic principle,
quantum mechanics, you can have states where it's there and there at the same time. So you have all
these superpositions between different alternatives. And that's very fundamental to the framework of
quantum mechanics. And the fact that you don't see most of these superpositions is not explained
by quantum mechanics. Now, on the other hand, general relativity has its basic principle,
which is the famous Galileo-Einstein principle of equivalence. Well, Galileo explained it very well. Imagine
dropping a big rock and a little rock from the leading tower of Pisa, and he knew that air resistance
would make a difference, and that feather would drop more slowly. But if you had no air resistance, they would
fall completely together. So as they fall, there is no effectively cancelled out gravity. So gravity is the one force,
if you can call it a force, which I'm a little bit dubious about. It's the one feature of physics which
you can cancel by free fall. And that feature is incompatible with the principle of superposition. And
you can make a little argument to show that they're inconsistent with each other. And to make them
consistent with each other, you have to introduce this collapse of the wave function. It also gives you a
measure of how much, when do you expect the collapse to take place. And it's not a complicated formula.
There's a formula I produced, which is actually not original with me, because Dayash Giosi had already
found this formula about two years earlier than I did. I wasn't aware of this work. But I had this
particular argument to show that this estimation of how long it takes for the wave function to collapse
is in accordance with what my argument is. Actually if I have an object, a big object, say like this
magnifying glass of mine, and I put it in the superposition of here and here, that superposition
would not last, well it'd be a tiny, tiny, tiny fraction of a second. If on the other hand it's a
carbon atom or something, and here and here, well it would probably, that superposition would last for
longer than the age of the universe. So it's a, but there is a genuine formula which you can write down,
which tells you how long that superposition would be expected to last before it collapses to one or the
other. And it has nothing at that level, nothing whatsoever to do with consciousness. It's a physical
formula, it's something which could be measured in an experiment. It has not yet been, because experiments,
as they exist, have not quite reached the level of sophistication in order to do this. There are
experiments which are currently under, being done, I mean not, they're not there yet, but they're aimed
at looking at this effect, and my hope is that they will see this effect when they get a little bit more
sophisticated than they are just yet. And it won't be too long, when I say not too long, probably within the
next 10 years.
And then to summarize, summarize you and then give you to the opportunity to respond to this. What I understand from this,
Sir Roger, you have making a plea to, I've heard you say we should not quantize gravity, but we should
gravitate, the gravitation of quantum theory, right? Sir, you see a much larger role to play for gravity
there, and of course this has to do with quantum gravity. So in finding a unifying theory, what Sir
Roger is talking about, which different angles or approaches do we have, and what do you see,
what would your response be to this? Well, I'm an outside observer, but I think
the difference that Sir Roger is highlighting between their positions is not so much about
the wave function itself, but collapse being an objective phenomenon. Sir Roger holds the position
of objective collapse, so he doesn't think that the collapse of the wave function is the consequence
of a free-willed choice. He sees this as a physically determined moment related to gravitational mass.
If gravitational mass crosses a certain threshold, the superposition will collapse into itself into
a defined state. So there is no free will there, it's a physical event. As a philosopher, the only
conceptual, it's not a problem, but an issue to be discussed that I see there is, can we speak of
physical quantities or physical variables before collapse? Can we speak of gravitational mass before
collapse, before measurement is done? But I think that that is the key difference. It's not so much on
the notion of what a wave function is a description of. There is very little doubt that the wave function
has a deterministic evolution. We know how to calculate that, it's linear. It's the non-linearity
process that we call collapse that is at stake here and the interpretation of it being an objective
physical process or a free-willed choice of the interiority of a system. Federico and I, and I dare
be with Federico on this one and not with Sir Roger, I don't think collapse really happens. I think if we
eventually get to a deeper understanding of what's going on, I think we realize that there is no collapse.
It's an epistemic, it's a transition from an epistemic idea to an ontological one. Sir Roger is raising his
hand to his forehead. I don't see how you can say it doesn't happen. I mean, you have to have something
which looks more or less like the classical world. And if you don't have the collapse of the wave function,
the quantum evolution of a state does not look like the classical world. It just doesn't. I mean, there are
arguments which people use which are sort of approaches to this, but you can look carefully
at these arguments and you see they don't do it. You have to have a development of quantum theory
which has not yet been formulated in the complete theory. All I can do is say the level at which I
expect collapse to take place. I say the collapse, if you have a physical situation with the parameters
of so-and-so, then I might expect collapse to take place within 10 minutes, say. And that calculation
could be done. But it doesn't tell you exactly when it happens. It doesn't tell you which way the collapse
happens. It doesn't give you a mechanism for collapse. It's just a formula which tells you how long a system can
remain in superposition before it collapses through one or the other. And the connection with consciousness, you see,
in my view, is quite secondary. And it's very important. I think I would certainly agree with both of you,
that it's very fundamental in the way the universe operates. Consciousness is playing a big role.
But it's a subtle role and it doesn't reveal itself until you have elaborate systems like living beings.
I'm aware animals, maybe all I know plants might possess it to some degree. But I don't see it in inanimate objects.
They're not sophisticated enough somehow to take advantage of the collapse of the wave function.
But for them, it's just a random process.
But do you think that if we would reach a deeper theory that maybe goes beyond quantum theory,
would we find out that consciousness is truly epiphenomenal at the end of the chain,
so to speak, in our universe? Or could such a theory point to the fundamentality of consciousness?
Where would you put your chips?
Oh yeah, I think it could be. I mean, if we understand, well, we need to understand the physics
better. But I would regard that as a small step. We don't have the theory yet. But I would think
within the next 50 years, we will have such a theory. I think that tells us we will understand
consciousness at that time. It's a much more sophisticated concept. But what I am saying is the
other way around. Whatever consciousness is, it's something which depends on that phenomenon.
So we're not going to have a physical understanding of what things in the universe are conscious.
I mean, even things like, you see, when I mentioned Stuart Hameroff earlier, I think I mentioned him,
but anyway, the connection with the macrotubules was something I learned from him.
And his job is an anaesthetist or anaesthesiologist. His job was to put people to sleep, except he
doesn't call it sleep. It's a different phenomenon. General anaesthetics are particular substances and
they have a very curious relationship to each other. For example, xenon, which is an inert gas,
doesn't seem to have much in the way of chemical interactions, nevertheless, is a general anaesthetic.
And what is the connection between these different substances which act as general anaesthetics?
As far as the chemistry is concerned, absolutely nothing. It doesn't seem to be they are chemically
connected. Nevertheless, there is some physical connection. And the view is that they do his view,
and I think he's probably right. His view is that these general anaesthetics do affect microtubules.
And it's the microtubular activity, which probably does involve the
collapse of wave function in their function, is something which general anaesthetics affect.
Because that's a subject which is active at the moment and needs to be a lot of work to find out
what's going on. But it's a long way from understanding consciousness, and I think that's a much more
difficult problem.
So, okay. Federico, please reply to Sir Roger.
Yeah, I had two main points. The first is that I feel that consciousness without free will
is not useful. It's not useful in a sense that if you cannot, you know, if you are conscious and,
you know, you probably should know your intentions, and you probably should know what
what the reality in which you exist is, so that you can decide how to, you know, how to proceed in
in your conscious living. But if you don't have free will, consciousness is really not useful.
And so I don't see any reason why it should exist. So that's one. And the two things that I start,
I don't want quantum physics to explain consciousness. I start by assuming that consciousness and free will
exist. And I arrive at describing why quantum physics must have the crazy properties it has
to justify the existence of consciousness and free will that I had taken as a postulate.
So here we really hit ontology also, right? In your interpretation of quantum theory.
The ontology is not in the quantum state. The ontology is in the meaning that the quantum state
produces within the consciousness of the field, which is assumed to have consciousness and free will.
Yes. So yeah, it's basically a phenomenological approach. You say, I see phenomenology of
consciousness with a private inner state that is non-clonable, which can hold sort of a free will
that manifests in a certain action. And then you say that resembles very much what we know about
quantum theory. So why not investigate that it could be that. And that also explains why we have
apparently two physics. We have quantum physics and classical physics connected by the collapse of the
wave function. So the quantum physics describes the interiority of nature and the classical theory
describes the exteriority of nature. One is described within, you know, in the realm of the Hilbert space,
the other in space and time. The shareable information, the bits, derived from the collapse of the wave
function according to the current theory. But in my theory they derive from a free will decision of the quantum
field that wants to pursue his own self-knowing, his own process of, you know, of understanding about reality.
So Roger, I'm just very curious. I know this is not your ontological position, but I'm just curious in
trying to solve the quantum conundrum, if you think it could be fruitful to pursue this route of saying maybe
on an ontological level we have to say the quantum fields are conscious and out of that consciousness
the classical world sort of comes to us. As some of the founding fathers themselves seem to suggest, I mean,
Max Planck saying consciousness is fundamental, derivative, matter is derivative of consciousness.
What are your thoughts here? Well, I think, I mean, I think these things are very different.
I think there's one confusion here, which I think I'd like to get rid of in a way. See, in the early
days of quantum mechanics, people worried about the collapse of the wave function, but not thinking
of it as a physical process. I mean, many people, including most particularly Wigner, because I talked
to him quite a lot when I was in Princeton, I had conversations with Wigner, which were very interesting.
And he had the view, as many others did, that somehow the collapse of the wave function was an
effect of consciousness. That is to say, the terminology in quantum theory is very much suggestive
of that, because it says you make an observation, and this observation induces the collapse of the
wave function. Now that you see, it's rather suggesting that the collapse doesn't take place
unless a conscious being comes along and looks at it. Then that measurement that the conscious being
makes by looking at it, if you like, collapses the wave function. So it's as though it's the consciousness
which causes the collapse of the wave function. That's very different from my view, it's almost
the opposite. In my view, it's saying, no, no, no, it's not that consciousness causes the collapse.
The collapse would take place quite independently of whether they're conscious beings or not.
I like to think of a particular example, I mean, just a sort of thought experiment, if you like.
I imagine that there's a very distant planet somewhere, which has very, very much like the Earth.
It just happens that no life, no conscious beings ever came about on that planet. But it's otherwise
like the Earth. Now, the weather on the Earth is supposed to be very delicate and dependent upon
very small effects. So the people talk about the butterfly effect. If the butterfly's wing flaps one
way, then the weather goes one way. And if it flaps a different way, then the weather might have a
completely different effect. So it's a thing which means that the behaviour of the system depends very,
very delicately on the initial state. Okay, now this planet that I'm imagining has no life on it,
no butterflies. Nevertheless, you have weather on this planet. But since there is no conscious being,
or no beings which collapse the wave function according to that view, collapse the wave function
doesn't take place, therefore you have weather which is a superposition of all different weathers.
And you have a space probe which goes to this planet and takes a photograph of the weather on the planet.
Now that weather, there's no being, no conscious being on the space probe, it just takes a photograph.
Now as it returns to the Earth, it transmits this photograph, which is now of a superposition
of different weathers, and somebody on a screen looks at the signal on the Earth, and as soon as
that being looks, that human being looks at the picture on the screen, suddenly collapse, the wave
function happens, because only then does the conscious being become part of the system, and then the
weather becomes one weather. To me this is completely ridiculous. The weather is going to be one weather,
whether there's a being on it or not. It's not because of living beings on the planet, it's not
because of consciousness on the planet, it's because the collapse of a wave function is a physical process
which takes place when things become large enough, superpositions become large enough, in a way which I
could be very explicit about if necessary, what I mean by large enough, and it would collapse the wave
function quite independently of conscious beings. Yeah, I think that's a clear clear position, and it also
sort of reminds me of Einstein, right? I like to think of the moon existing, if I look or not.
So I think you're in a very good company with this position. Bernardo, please respond to this thought
experiment of psorology. Oh, no, not a direct response, it's just an observation. I think
we may be limiting ourselves to a dichotomy that maybe we don't need to limit ourselves to. The
dichotomy I sense is, is it consciousness that causes collapse, or is it collapse that leads to a
moment of consciousness? Yeah. There is a dichotomy there, but the dichotomy presupposes the wave
function to be ontically real. In other words, it presupposes that the world out there is actually
in a superposition of states, a physical superposition of states. If that's what we start from, then of
course, as Sir Roger mentioned earlier, then of course there has to be collapse, because when we look
around, we see a world in a definite state. I think where Federico is coming from, I may be wrong
about this, but that's what I think, and certainly that's where I am coming from, is I don't think the
wave function is ontically real. I think the wave function is a model of the best of our knowledge about
the world. In other words, the superposition of states is our own gambling strategy about what we are likely
to see next. It doesn't mean that the world is an actual superposition. And if the world is not in
that actual superposition, in that sense, then there is no collapse. Collapse is an epistemic transition.
It's the transition from what we anticipate to see and the probabilities we lay out about what we are
likely to see next, and an observation of what is actually next. You see what I mean? So maybe we don't
need to limit ourselves to that dichotomy. Just a clarification point. That's all I'm trying to do.
Federico? Yeah, well, I have just a very simple point to add. In my theory, the ontic state is not
the wave in the pure quantum state. It's actually the experience of the pure quantum state, which is
within consciousness. And that's the one that then could cause the collapse of the wave function, which
is not a collapse of the wave function, a decision of the field to decide what to manifest in space
and time. So the ontic aspect of reality is not in quantum quantum physics is epistemic. In fact,
that it can only tell us what we can know about reality. It doesn't tell us what reality is. So the
actual reality is determined, if you start the game with consciousness and free will, by those two
properties that you have postulated from the beginning. Interesting. So, Roger, where are you
on these epistemic versus ontic interpretations of the wave function? Well, you see, there is a very
important development in my thinking, which I don't quite know when I first saw it, within the last five
years, certainly. I think the first thing I ever talked about, there was a conference in Arizona,
the idea, but it got developed since then, that you can't talk about reality quite like that. There are
two kinds of reality. There's quantum reality and classical reality, and they are not quite the same.
And quantum reality behaves in a way which is quite strange. The notion of quantum reality actually
comes from Einstein in a certain sense. He talked about a quantum state. He said, is the quantum state
real or not? And a good example is the spin of a spin-half particle. I take an electron. Now,
the spin of an electron, the different possible spin states are spin right-handed about all possible
directions. So I can move my thumb about the axis, and it spins right-handed about that axis. Now, all
those different possible states, those are the possible spin states of an electron. Now, what you can't do
is ask the electron what your spin state is, or you can try, but it doesn't give you any answer,
because that's a quantum reality. However, if you do have a theory which says, by now,
the electron ought to be spinning, say, about that particular direction, and it has all about the
same amount, that's an electron, it's always the same amount, about that direction. Now, what I can do is
I can confirm it, and this is Einstein's criterion. I can say to the electron, I'm going to measure the
electron spin in that direction, and if I have it right, it will say, yes, you got it right with 100%
certainty, and it will not disturb the system. You can measure it again and again and again,
and then each time it says yes. If I measure it in a different direction, it will give you a
probabilistic answer. It will maybe say no, maybe yes, depends on you do experiment many, many times,
and we'll give you different answers. Now, the quantum state is something you can confirm, in a
sense, but you cannot ascertain it. You have to make a distinction between confirming and ascertaining.
Ascertaining would be something you say, hello state, which way are you spinning? It doesn't answer
questions like that. But you can explain these rather puzzling things, which is what Einstein was
worried about, in fact. These things called Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen experiments,
where you can have a spin state, which is shared by two observers, or two people, let's call them,
widely separated. And you know what the total spin, each one has a spin-half particle,
which has come from a spin-zero initial state, and so they have to be opposite each other. Now,
if one of the individuals measure the spin in some direction, that instantly makes it the opposite,
actually worsen instantly. It goes backwards in time, along the past light curve, and the other
one is fixed by the measurement made by the one. And the other one, if that other one could ascertain
what the state was, you would then have a contradiction. You could send signals faster than light.
But you can't send signals faster than light, it would lead you into contradiction with relativity.
However, what you could do is confirm that state. If the other person knew what the measurement,
the first one they made, then that measurement could be confirmed. But it cannot be ascertained.
And if you could ascertain it, you could send signals faster than light, which would lead you into real
trouble. Relativity would be working in real trouble. However, you can make this, the quantum reality of
that state is projected backwards along the past light, light current, so it goes not just simultaneously,
but even back in time. But since that's only quantum reality, you cannot ascertain what that state is.
So you have to make a distinction between the quantum reality, which cannot be ascertained,
but it can be confirmed. Classical reality can be ascertained. So you can ask the state what it is,
and it tells you what it is. So that distinction is something which has to be made when you talk about
reality. So reality, when you talk about quantum mechanics, the notion of reality, you've got to be
careful about it. It's not like classical reality where there is any one notion of reality.
I fully, that distinction is very clear to me. And you're talking about Bell's inequality
theorem, right? And the loophole-free Bell tests that have been performed, I think, by now.
And then a common thing I hear physicists say, we either have to let go of
realism, reality, or we have to let go of locality. Is that true? But I'm curious.
Well, you see, it's not reality. It's quantum reality is not reality in the sense, you see,
that's the trouble. If you turn world into reality, then you might lead to a confusion about this.
But if you look at the sort of more hardcore, so to speak, ontic interpretations, would you agree that
those end up with like many worlds interpretations, because you want the wave function to be ontic?
And what's your take on that? Not many worlds. No, I'm dead against it. Well, I have to be careful
about this. I have a point of view. This has to be taken in the right spirit. My point of view
is that it's a good thing to have had in certain stages of your life to have believed in the many
worlds interpretation. The shorter period, the better. I did go through such a stage myself,
believing in the many worlds interpretation. But I hope, I can't remember how long it was.
Whether it was as long as a year, I'm not sure.
And then one goes to a more adult position of an epistemic interpretation or?
Well, you say, no, the theory is not really complete, or you have to understand that these
notions of reality are more subtle. And without having the quantum mechanical picture, you say,
I don't think, I argue, philosophers could argue with each other endlessly, without realizing this way,
strange way in which quantum states behave. And I think spin is a good example. And well,
this is the Boehm version of the EPR, Einstein Podolsky. But Einstein wanted to do it that way
originally, but I think Podolsky talked to him about it.
Sir Roger, may I lend your beautiful mind on a question that's been sort of stuck with me ever
since we met and I've discussed things with you. Yesterday, we had an evening and we talked about
semantics versus syntax. And we refer to Searle's Chinese room experiment, right? Can you get from
pure syntax to semantics, which is a deep problem? What do you think there? To me,
it seems impossible. The two seem two different categories. And that's why it feels as if I have to
pick my ontology. Is our universe in the end, physical material, or is it conscious and has to do
with meaning? That's how it feels to me. But I'm curious here, what do you think about an experiment?
Can we get from syntax to semantics? You're talking about the reality of the world,
in some sense. Can we talk about the reality of the world in an objective way? Is that the sort
of question we need? Yes, but it also has to do with what philosophers call qualia. If I have a taste of
something, can we ever have a complete mathematical description of what I've experienced,
which would make it clonable, copyable to another? And then, of course, I don't see any objections
that then we can have conscious AIs, because then you could have my conscious experience completely
described, copied into a computer. But I sense that we have a fundamental problem there.
Well, I think there are some subtle differences here. You see, okay, philosophers and physicists
worry about different things. Well, I'm not quite sure. Let me not say that. But you see,
the computability issue is a separate question. I mean, that's a mathematical problem,
whether you can compute the thing from your physical theory or not. Actually, also,
when you talk about qualia, I mean, we don't know. I mean, is the sensation of blueness
common to different people? If I see a blue entity that creates a certain impression on me,
and somebody else looks at the blue thing, and does that person have anything that you could say
is the same as my experience? I would just say we don't know. It could well be that there is
something in detail which is the same. We certainly don't know enough about that. But I find very
curious things like, what, synesthesia, where you have parts of the brain, if they get it mixed up,
but then one sensation gets sort of confused with another sensation. It does seem to be that there
is something different between one kind of sensation and another kind of sensation, which may be a
universal thing. It may be that different people, you might say, philosophically, how can you ever
know? Well, maybe someday we will be able to know. And maybe there is something about blueness, redness,
or greenness, or something which is universal. And if you have synesthesia of some kind, maybe some
people would see the blueness as green and so on, possibly. I have no idea. I can't see anything against
that, but it seems quite possible that these sensei qualia, if you like, are things which have some
objective physical basis. I don't know. I'm not trying to claim that that's the case or not.
I certainly think that as a pleasant level of understanding, we're a long way from that.
And we can talk about it in a more philosophical way. So, okay, this is one person who has a certain
sensation of so-and-so, and that's individual to that being, and it's meaningless to say it's the same as
what somebody else feels. I don't know the answer to that. I think they're clearly not objective.
Yeah, it's a clear position. Federico, you can respond or what?
Yeah, to me, qualia, qualia can be represented by a pure quantum state. But a representation of qualia is
not the sensations of qualia. A theory of reality is not reality, right? I mean, the, so the quantum
state, the pure quantum state, is the map of a territory which can only be known from within
consciousness. So consciousness is what allows you to understand, to know and understand what you feel,
what you feel, which is qualia. And mathematics can only go to that point of saying the representation
of qualia has to be a quantum field because it has the same characteristic. It's private, and you can
only know a small part of what you can know from within.
Yeah, so what Sir Roger was saying, the blueness of blue, and that we cannot know for sure.
That is beyond what you can test, beyond what is testable.
And I guess this, because when you say that the mathematics is the map and it cannot give us the
territory. Here, of course, Sir Roger, you have sometimes said that you do grant mathematics an
antique status, right? That there somehow is a mathematic realm of mathematics. Please correct me
if I'm, I'm misrepresenting your view, but...
I have no question. Oh, sorry. I was talking about your ontology in the end. I think you have
sometimes said that you think mathematics has some antique status in our universe, that there is a realm
of mathematics. And that would say that it isn't only a map of reality, but it just like, it truly exists.
Oh, I see. That's a slightly different question. Yes, I would say it has an existence, an objective
existence. Well, sure, if somebody proves the theorem. I mean, Andrew Wiles proved that there were no
x to the n. You can have a sum of two squares, which is another square, but there's no other power,
which the sum of two of those powers gives you another thing which has the same power. I mean,
that's a mathematical statement, and that would be true whether the universe had different physical
laws. I mean, it's completely independent. It's a mathematical statement which is objectively true.
How we come across to understand why it's true, maybe a very difficult question. Maybe very few people
really understand how many people have gone through Andrew Wiles' proof, for example. I mean, not many,
but I've never been through it, for example, but I still think he's right, that the
Fermat Theorem that he established is objectively true, and if you had a different universe,
well, not even a different universe, I'm not sure what that means exactly, but I could imagine the
universe with physical laws which are not the same as ours, and they contemplate the possibility of
conscious beings in their universe, possibly. We don't know enough about physics to know how unique
these physical laws are, and could you change the parameters which we have in our physical laws to
some other numbers, and have another perfectly good laws of physics, where the physical properties would
be different? Possibly, we don't know. But the mathematical laws will be the same, so things like whether
or not we have a sum of two powers which are the same, that's going to be true whichever universe you're in.
I think that's the thing you're referring to. Whether the mathematical world is an objective
world independent of us, it has its existence. Yeah, that is my question, and so you are saying that
in some sense it is like in a platonic realm of forms, it has a place, you say. Yes, yes.
Bernardo, how do you listen to this as a philosopher? Well, clearly the theorems of mathematics,
or the axioms of mathematics that are in logic, that are self-evident to us, have an application
to the world, because we create these descriptions in mathematics, and they are incredibly predictive.
So stuff that is merely self-evident to us, because we are just primates,
why would stuff that is self-evident to our cognitive system hold for the world at large,
right? There was a paper written by Eugene Wigner in which he talks about this miracle,
he uses the word miracle 12 times, a 1960 paper. So I think this substantiates the point Sir Roger is
making, that the mathematics is not arbitrary, it seems to have an existence independent of the minds
that consider those axioms self-evident. To me, but that's just my philosophical position,
I'm aligned with Federico in this sense, I think the only ontological primitive is a field of subjectivity,
and since to be is to have properties, things that are, are what they are, and not something else
they conceivably could be. So to be is to have properties, and it so happens that this field of
subjectivity, which is mental therefore, has archetypal patterns that are built in. It has a preferential
way of mentation, so to say, certain things that it considers self-evident, because it is what it is,
instead of being something else. And because we are segments of this field, and so is the rest of the
world, what we consider self-evident turns out to be applicable to the world. But we can account for
this without another realm. We only need that whatever the ontological primitive is, whatever nature
actually is at the bottom level, is the same for us and the world, and that we have subjective access
to it. And then we can account for it without anything beyond nature. I have a strange suggestion,
but tell me if you're up for it, Roger. I'd like to have a bit more of a poetic approach, almost.
If we read John Wheeler's notion of the participatory universe, it seems as if somehow the universe
is writing itself. I mean, that's the classical world we perceive, right? And whatever the universe
is, the world we perceive as observers is this classical universe, and we know quantum theory to be
correct. So somehow it is as if the universe is writing itself. And we had a conference a while back
with Lee Smolin, who you must know. And also seeing a phrase that really stuck with me that
universe is nothing but a collection of partial views of itself. Also sort of this wheeler notion.
And I'm just so curious, what do you think? Is this all physicists talking poetry?
Maybe. Maybe. I don't know, of course, I knew Wheeler quite well. But he was a hard person to
understand, and I always found it rather difficult. He was always very wise and everything, and I found
that if you talk to him, you have a question or you talk to him, and his reply would be about 37 and a half
degrees away from your question. And I'm not making that figure as an exact number, of course. But it
was always a little bit angled away from what you thought. And it was quite strange in some ways,
sort of interesting, but yeah. But that whole idea of the people saying the universe
wanting to know itself, the universe looking back at itself, all those stuff he pondered about,
or because he did, in the end, also did, he could not give the clear answer, right? But
what are your thoughts there? Is it something that sort of also...
I don't know. I got lost after a while. He kept talking about it from bits and things like that.
And I think I got lost at that stage. I guess it got too philosophical. I have to say, I don't know.
I just find it difficult to... I think quantum mechanics confuses people too much. That's the
trouble. And I think the trouble it confuses people is not quite for the reasons people think. I mean,
it's partly because you have these two kinds of reality. You can't really ask of a quantum state,
you can't measure what the quantum state is. And it's the same thing I said before, you can't ascertain
the state. You can only confirm it. So if you think you know what it ought to be by now, then you can do
an experiment, very, very precisely test whether you got it right or not. But if you don't have any
concept of what the quantum state is, well it may be that you can't ascertain it with these Einstein,
Podolsky, Rosen types of experiments. You have to... I'm taking the view that you have to take this more...
With quantum mechanics there is a notion of reality which doesn't come about until you think about
quantum mechanics. I don't think pure philosophy would give it. It's not a notion which comes from
philosophical thinking. It's an notion which comes from physics. And it's interesting and different
from what we've attempted to think before, where reality is something you might imagine.
I've expressed myself on that before. Yeah, it's very clear. I think it would be nice to
because, Sir Roger, I think we did not discuss an end time or we have already crossed it. So I don't
want to... I want to respect your time and energy. So if the two of you have a final question for Sir Roger,
maybe, and I have a question to all three of you to wrap this conversation up. My question would be
simply that if consciousness existed without free will, what do you think, what good would it do?
I mean, I frankly cannot get my head around that.
Well, you see, I think it's not... I mean, it's an interesting question because
it doesn't seem to me necessary that consciousness is causing it in some sense. I can imagine somebody
being paralyzed completely. I mean, you get this, this happens. People are completely paralyzed and
nobody can tell whether that person is actually conscious or not. And later on you find that person
may wake up in some sense and you find they were conscious all the time. They knew what was going on,
it's just they couldn't influence anything. So in some sense, this notion of being,
we'd be having free will in the sense of affecting things, is not so obviously a necessity,
from what I mean by... I can imagine that one can have a subjective experience
without being able to use that to affect any way. It seems to be something a little different.
To be able to use one's consciousness in an effective way is a little bit different from
actually having consciousness. I'm not sure I would want to identify them perhaps as strongly as I think
maybe you're suggesting.
Yeah, because to me, consciousness without free will would have no causal power, so it would do no good to any
entity. Exactly, it's not causal power, because if you have this person who is in the state,
I forget to take the term for it, but who is simply aware of what's going on but has no control
over emotions and things like that, that person is conscious. Yeah, yeah, no, but what would be the
point of being conscious if you cannot do anything about it? You see what I mean?
Oh, that's right. They can't do anything with it, but that's a different question.
Well, yeah, but you know, why should consciousness even exist if it has no causal power? That's my
question, yeah. No, no, I would agree that clearly it does exist, and I think I would agree with you there.
It's the fact that it can have a causal effect is the only reason why beings have evolved with it.
I mean, as you said, there would be no point in beings evolved who had consciousness if it had no
effective influence on the world. So sure, I think that's absolutely essential, but it doesn't seem to
me it's quite the same thing as being aware. Have your views on free will shifted in the last decade?
I mean, you have opened the door, I think here you say that the door's open for you to free will.
Where are you now? Do you have free will? Is that a question for me? Yes, sorry, to you, yeah.
Yes, well, you see, I have thought a little bit more about free will. I've often thought I don't
really know what it means, but I think I would like to say that I have a better idea of what I
think it might mean. And it depends on, you see, you could say, sometimes people think free will is,
oh, you can have a will to do anything, can you be random or something like this. I keep being reminded
of when I was growing up with my little brother, who was two years younger than I was, and he could
beat me at pretty well any game. But the thing that disturbed me the most, he could beat me at paper,
stones and scissors, you see. Now I thought that game is a pure game of chance, how can he beat me at that
game? So I went away and I got a whole table of logarithms out of my father's study, and I made a
little table, you know, three means this and so on. And so I make a long strip, and I would follow this
strip and simply do what the strip said, and then I broke even. So I got relieved, you see, it's not
that he was magic and it's just that he noticed patterns and when I was trying to be random, you see.
So free will is different from randomness. You see, sometimes people suggest that free will means
you can do what you like, and therefore there's a sort of randomness in it. I think that's the wrong
way of looking at it. I don't mean that, by the way. I'm not saying this is your point of view, but I am
saying that it's, if you like, the free will is to use it. See, if I think action A is preferable to action B,
and I have used my consciousness to work it all out and I say blah blah blah blah blah blah blah,
I go through it all, and I think no action A is probably the better thing to do. And then when
the moment comes, then I do action A. I'm doing the action A because I had the free will that was
involved in my understanding of which is better to do. It's not that, like when you touch the stove and
it's hot and you put your hand away and things like that, which are clearly not free will actions.
it's something where you're using your consciousness in a way which involves
your understanding of what's the right thing to do it's more like that
it's not a complete answer to the question i dare by the way disagree when when you both of you say
there there would be no point in you in in in no free will and consciousness because
say we have a movie theater i can enjoy a beautiful movie without being able to influence any of the
scenes the thing has been recorded and it's playing out i could still enjoy it which would be a conscious
experience so that and this is okay there bernardo yeah i think this one is also hits on what when you
as a philosopher think about free will versus consciousness and you don't see the necessity
to you i i don't deny free will i i just think the concept is is is not precise so people mean
different things like we think that if something is determined then there cannot be free will
but that's not what we mean when you talk about our free will it's like my choices are not random
they are determined by me my tastes my preferences my inclinations so it's not like free will is is
dichotomous with determinism it's about what is determining it and what we identify with if
we as if we identify with the cause of factors that make determination we say oh free will but if
we don't we see oh we don't have free will well you see it's it's it's not a dichotomy it's not
contradictory but but i am with you that um i think there is still well i think the search for truth
should not depend on what makes us feel good or not the truth is it's not of course um but even
if the truth turns out to be that the universe is determined i would still see um room for what
we colloquially refer to as free will because then the factors that are making the determination are
those factors that i identify with i am making those determinations now never mind that i can't be other
than i am so my choices will always be determined by that which i am i can't will my will like
schopenhauer said i can only act according to my will but i can't will myself to will differently so
at the end does it matter you know so um but i understand how you use the word federico you talk
about free will as a impetus that leads to changes of states absolutely yeah that's exactly right yeah
so that i i could call that determination too and it would still have the same effect yeah but
but it is a determination that has origin on an inner state as opposed to a objective collapse of the
wave function for example yes an inner state that you identify that i identify with which i have control over
which i have control over i can choose where to look or i can choose what i feel what i what to say or
what i feel okay those are those are the the bottom choices are only choices of what do i communicate
what i choose to observe and what i choose to communicate which is something which is within me
so those are those those are the only choices that are considered free will because the rest of it is
it's just it's just you know it confuses the idea of what free will is so i'm i'm quite a quite in
agreement with both of you when you consider free will i can do whatever i want and that's absolutely
silly okay yeah and uh um one uh if we're all okay still the uh in your book federico talks about the fact
so roger that we are quantum classical uh machines so to speak the body our physical body is quantum
classical now if this evidence is right that has just come out and we there's now the a branch of
discipline called quantum biology that thinks these phenomena are much uh broader we see them in nature
these these these quantum classical aspects would that mean could that mean that consciousness is
not restricted to brains i mean if in biology we see quantum classical phenomena on cellular level what
are your thoughts there so roger do you think consciousness could could could a bacterium be
conscious for instance or the thing is i don't know you see i think consciousness is certainly not
restricted just to humans they're like certainly but how far down if i can use the word down in the
animal being plant and how far does it go you see i think i think uh but if people are dog owners
are very convinced that their dogs are conscious and i believe that is correct i have no reason to
disbelieve that um i think that dogs are conscious i think that elephants are conscious i think octopuses
are conscious they don't have to be mammalian at all but whether an ant is conscious or not i won't worry
more about maybe maybe not whether a honeybee is conscious maybe a better chance i think they do complicated
things they seem to be able to um even do simpler arithmetic apparently so uh how far down if i can
use the word down in the animal kingdom it goes i have no idea i think it probably goes pretty far down
whether a bacterium could be considered to be conscious i would be much more dubious about but
i'm only guessing yeah yeah but and and yeah sorry just one because i'm so curious what your thoughts
are in in people have like pan psychist ideas when they think uh um let's say a cell is conscious and
then they have what's called the combination problem because how then does do do i feel like one
consciousness hunts and not sort of a sort of weird sensation of being trillion cells at the same time
are these stuff that you think about or have thoughts on well it's got to be something so i do
think it's got something to do with the quantum state and since i argue it to be to do with the
collapse of wave function then you've got to have a wave function to collapse and big wave functions
collapse more than little wave functions in a certain sense so according to such a view
you you would have to have quite a big coherent object you see it's wrong probably to think of
individual cells it's probably a collective effect i mean many quantum effects are like that when you
talk about some superconductivity there are many quantum effects which are quite big in a certain sense
of extensive um quantum fluid fluidity things like that uh sure so it's not just thinking you know
just individual atoms how much does each atom have and edit out that's not the out it's got to be
something much more collect collective definition and i have one final question for the the three of
you maybe federico nice if you can start we've um discussed the the the dangers and the threats of
ai especially as things are now progressing so fast and especially and here also sir roger i i remember
you saying it's not um we don't have to fear computers being intelligent what we have to fear is that we
start believing they are truly intelligent so i remember you saying saying that and uh what if i
ask the three of you um what defines the human and could we say that the era of computation points back
at us that we are are much more and so probably better serve on a meaning purpose level what are your
thoughts here so federico what defines the human if a human is defined by having a consciousness
that is not actually in the physical body is in the field that controls the physical body
and so the sensations and feelings and free will are properties of the field is a quantum field
doesn't exist in space and time um so so if you believe that then a lot of the our intelligence
there are real intelligence are you know what distinguishes us from artificial intelligence is
is the semantics is the fact that you have an experience that you can comprehend what you are
experiencing uh you'll get the meaning of it and and that of course is the ontology as i said earlier
so so symbols follow the ontology of the c of the meaning so these symbols are in fact in service of
the fact that these fields want to communicate with each other and they need uh classical symbols
which are shareable symbols like bits that can be copied to communicate they cannot they cannot trans
transfer what they feel directly because that's a quantum state that cannot be duplicated so this is
impossible to communicate what you feel to any other field but you can communicate by translating
some of what you feel into shareable feelings and that's that's also accounts for why there has to be
a classical world classical board has to exist for two reasons one to communicate feel to feel to
communicate their meaning with classical symbols with shareable symbols and the other one to store the
experience because the actual experience the quantum experience can only last a very short amount of
time so it's actually in the present so you need to store that experience in classical with classical symbols
that you can then retrieve in the present in order to make sense of what you of virtue of your life
thank you yeah and then bernardo how would you like to close that what defines the human and
especially in relation to the era of computation what defines us is our inner life whatever it comes
from what defines us is what it what it is like to be us right not how we present ourselves to external
observation but what it is like to be us um i don't think there will ever be anything that is like to
be a silicon computer in and of itself i think assuming that there can be is mistaking a simulation for the
thing simulated it's like thinking that if you simulate a black hole in your computer which you
can do very accurately you will be sucked into your computer because your simulation is accurate and i
think the same thing with ai that it simulates how the patterns of how we associate tokens words word
segments the fact that it can simulate that well because it has been trained on text written by human
human doesn't at all mean that what it is like to be it while it is processing tokens is anywhere near
what it is like to be us when we are speaking as a matter of fact i don't think there is anything
it is like to be it in and of itself a large language model is just a computer that applies
geometrical transformations to tokens it's manipulation of symbols like in searle's chinese room experiment
and i think it is a great danger that um because those symbol manipulations now can be done at such
a large scale um that llms come across to us as things like us the illusion is now becoming so
compelling that we will start thinking that we are mechanisms or in sir sir roger's words that we will
start thinking that we are formal systems because those llms are formal systems and they seem to behave like
us now where does the illusion come from well it's obvious it seems to behave like us because it was
trained on our output it was trained on human text so it quacks like a duck because it was made to imitate
the duck so the fact that it quacks like a duck doesn't mean at all that it is a duck any more than
because a shop window mannequin that was made to look like a human that similarity doesn't mean that it
is human it was constructed to look like a human by humans by humans an llm was constructed to talk
like humans by humans trained on human text so that it quacks like us doesn't mean that it is anywhere
near us but the illusion is so compelling that we may start believing this kind of grotesque nonsense
so roger would you agree to this are your views on a ai still the same even with the last
developments i think um i don't think that my view has changed as a whole the trouble is that you can
get devices see i think that without being conscious these devices will not actually well put it the other
way around um but they won't be intelligent if you like and uh i think ai is a is a misnomer so it
means artificial intelligence and in fact the fact that one calls it ai is rather suggestive but well
it is suggestive that you just have your powerful enough computer and then it will become actually
intelligent now you see for me this goes against i mean the initial argument which i was trying to make at
the beginning of this discussion came from the lectures given by steen which i put formulated my
viewpoint there what he showed is that that your understanding really is not a computation so you can
you can put in as much in the way of computational power you can make the thing play chess as well as you
can or you can make it play go so that it would be played these moves better than any human being
like that's quite possible but does it understand what it's doing well it would have to be conscious
to understand what it's doing of course it's hard to formulate this because what does it mean to say
understand something if i perform in such a way that looks as though it understands it and the trouble is
is that i can imagine that the technology will get to such a degree that it's very hard to tell whether
or not it's conscious it doesn't mean that it is conscious and i certainly would argue that a
computational system in other words computer let me use the word computer that's what we mean after all
a computer in the sense that we mean it which is a computational system will not ever
be intelligent doesn't mean that it couldn't simulate the intelligence to a degree that you might be fooled by
i mean it's it's a it's a difficult question but i i would say that ai i mean it has its dangers
the dangers are not that it will take over and become more intelligent than us the dangers are
it would be misuse ways which could fool us well that sort of stuff and yeah thank you so much roger
and i i cannot um i find it very special that you took time for us and i also find it just very special
i i contact your assistant and he that you are still up for this sitting down with us and i see a
bookshelf full full of books are your days still spend are you still every day reading thinking how
does that go on your age i still have my book books because i don't want to throw them out but i have a
difficulty that i can barely read because my eyes are i have macular degeneration which means i have to
magnify it up hugely in order to see it i should probably one of these reading devices on my computer
which can read to me i haven't done that yet but your days your days are still spent thinking
over all these deep problems you are in that sense still working it gets more difficult as i get older
i think yes i get more easily thank you so much and um yeah i i cannot do more i cannot do more than
thank you very much sir roger because this has been a very very good discussion thank you i've
enjoyed it too yes i'm very grateful as well thank you thank you so much roger we'll let you and your
assistant know when this video comes online and i wish you all the best and both of you in finding
answers to these deep questions and it's also beautiful to just discuss and ponder about these
questions of life thank you very much for watching and we will let you know when next videos come up
around all of these topics thanks so much
