Why should you still be beholden to ideas of one-person, one-vote democracy as the kind of
default? I want to spend a moment on this topic of monarchy. That's good, because the time
horizons of a monarch supposedly are longer than the time horizons of a CEO, let alone a four-year
elected congressperson. David Friedman is literally the author of Anarcho-Capitalism.
The Machinery of Freedom is his most important book, but he also has written a couple fantasy
novels. If you want to check out Salamander, then I encourage you to. LARPing as well,
literally cosplaying? Yeah, I mean, not just that. He was one of the kind of pioneers of the LARP
cosplay movement in the United States, setting up an annual function in northern Pennsylvania.
This would be really funny if these people weren't in charge of the world.
Welcome to Doomscroll. I'm your host, Joshua Sidarella. My guest is Quinn Slobodian,
a professor of international history at Boston University. His books, which have been translated
into ten languages, include Globalists, The End of Empire and the Birth of Neoliberalism,
Crack-Up Capitalism, Market Radicals and the Dream of a World Without Democracy,
and his forthcoming Hayek's Bastards, Race, Gold, IQ, and the Capitalism of the Far Right.
He has been an associate fellow at Chatham House and held residential fellowships at Harvard and the
Free University of Berlin. He is the co-director of the History and Political Economy Project
and is on the board of editors of the American Historical Review. Prospect UK named him one of the
world's 25 top thinkers in 2024. He is considered by many to be the world's foremost historian on the
subject of neoliberalism. Neoliberalism is probably the most misused and abused word in today's political
discourse. Yeah. If you look on Twitter, you will find things like neoliberalism is printing money,
neoliberalism is austerity. Neoliberalism is also somehow gay people in the military, but then it's
the social conservatism of Reagan. How should we approach this term? What does neoliberalism actually
mean? Yeah. Well, I mean, I think the problem is it gets used and thrown around in such promiscuous
ways. And I tend to think of it being used basically in three main ways. One way is to kind of describe a
period of history. So often people will be like, when did neoliberalism start? Was it the closing
of the gold window in 1971? Was it the Volcker shock in 1979? Was it Thatcher and Reagan's
election? And then the second question is, when did it end or is it over? So it's a way of sort of
creating an epoch understanding of this era of global capitalism. Another way it gets understood as a kind
of bundle of policy instruments. So a bunch of things that you could go down the laundry list with
privatization, deregulation, liberalization of trade, free trade, austerity, cutting back state
spending. These are then seen as a kind of a pick and choose kind of package. And you can look at a
country and say like, that country went neoliberal in year X because they did things one to five,
or they didn't because they only did one and two. So that can kind of move around the world and you
can point at different actors in different countries and say they're neoliberal. A third way though,
is to think of it as a kind of intellectual movement or ideology. The same way you would
study the development of anarchist thought or socialist thought or conservative thought, you
know, you can find key thinkers, key texts, key moments when their ideas broke through. And that's
the approach I tend to use because in fact, since the 1930s, people have described themselves as
neoliberals. They've stopped since for the most part, but nevertheless, you can see this kind of
evolving conversation from decade to decade, which is fascinating and kind of diverse and complex
because the challenges facing capitalism at any given time are evolving too. So the work that I've
done, especially in globalists and crack up capitalism is to sort of say, what were neoliberals
worried about most in year X? Like in the 1930s, it was socialists on the one side and fascists on the
other, two varieties of collectivists. So you needed to kind of find a middle ground. By the 1950s and
60s, the kind of high point of the welfare state and Keynesianism and social democracy, they were
actually more worried about kind of the soft social Democrats in places like West Germany and France and the
United States than they were about sort of Stalin and Khrushchev and the communists. Flash forward
to the nineties, it's about environmentalists. It's about feminists. It's about people pushing
affirmative action, civil rights. These now are seen as like the primary opponents. So neoliberalism in
that definition and the way I've defined it is the kind of ongoing project to protect capitalism from
different forms of democracy and what democracy looks like at any time sort of varies. But I think
another really important sort of revision that I'm doing that relates to your first question
is this sort of shorthand idea that neoliberalism means like the marketization of everything or just
like markets set free, markets unleashed, markets unfettered. You know, the idea that in the 1990s
and 2000s, the market ruled the globe and states were withering away on like maybe even moving towards
disappearance. States are totally necessary for the functioning of neoliberalism. There was never a moment
where, you know, markets took over and states vanished. In fact, what I describe in the book is we need to
think of it less as kind of unfettering markets and more in terms of states encasing markets. So setting up
new laws, setting up new institutions to make sure certain kind of market outcomes happen and other
ones don't. So that's, you know, neoliberalism to me is actually less a theory of markets and the
economy. People like Hayek actually thought that the market was a kind of sublime object which could
not actually be understood. It was like resistant to knowing. So all you could do actually was set up a
framework of laws around it. So in that sense, neoliberalism is kind of more of a project of
state design and legal design than it is of, you know, perceiving the truth of markets per se.
People have stopped referring to themselves as neoliberals. I think that's because everyone just
assumes that this is the political consensus. Like you would not need to refer to yourself as a fish in
water. If neoliberalism is the elite consensus of how we should organize states and economies, then
you don't need to describe yourself as that. But maybe to lay the foundation here, we can start
your research surrounding the Geneva School of neoliberalism specifically. They set up these
institutional frameworks. What do we mean when we talk about neoliberal institutions? Like what are some
practical examples of that enshrining private property rights above the sovereign powers of states?
Yeah. Yeah. So that, I mean, historically, that's the big intervention of globalists because
I think that even someone who's maybe taken a class in college on this, the working definition
you might have a little more, you know, defined than just market set free for neoliberalism might be
something like you get on the cover of David Harvey's brief history of neoliberalism, right?
Which is four faces, Deng Xiaoping, Ronald Reagan, Augusto Pinochet, and Margaret Thatcher. And what he
tells is a story of like a crisis of profitability in the 1970s, inflation, overly aggressive demands from
the working class, you know, a period of great strike activity in the 1970s, then a counterrevolution
sort of nation by nation against the power nascent of the working class. So you begin with a kind of
iron fist of Pinochet and the death squads in the 1970s and the outlawing of competing socialist parties.
And then it gets rolled out in slightly, you know, modified forms, country after country after country.
So if pushed, people would probably say, well, the genesis of neoliberalism is somewhere around there,
like in the kind of democratic crisis of the 70s, the crisis of profitability of the 70s.
What I say in globalists is actually, no, you have to go back much, much earlier. And I look actually at the end of the
first age of globalization. The first age of globalization, which historians talk about quite a bit, but isn't really
necessarily part of the kind of common knowledge, is from about the 1870s to the outbreak of the First World War.
So that's a period where, because of new technology, because of steamships, telegraphs, and the possibility of
people and goods to move around the world with such relative ease, anchored by the gold standard, you were
getting a kind of a convergence of world prices towards a kind of a common standard. So if you could sit in
Hamburg and buy a kind of a pound of coffee for next year, and that would immediately activate a whole network
of kind of activity and production and negotiation and sort of downstream economic effects that would
then eventually come back up to the distribution of that coffee, either in Hamburg itself or someone
else. So you had what we think of as globalization, you know, a single world market, a sense of
interdependence, a high level of labor mobility. That was already happening before the First World War.
Right, right.
The First World War kind of smashed that up. Yeah. And I think you can understand neoliberalism partially
by a kind of a nostalgia for that lost unity of the world economy before the First World War.
Yeah. In particular, the people that I look at in that book were operating in the Habsburg Empire,
you know, anchored in Vienna. The Habsburg Empire, the biggest free trade zone in Europe,
managed to actually pull off this sort of solution to a puzzle that has, you know, stumped a lot of
other policymakers, which is how can you have like one economic space in which people can travel around
and compete as workers, sell and buy things and compete as consumers and producers. And yet you can
also give people a sense of political representation and kind of national identity. So the Habsburg Empire
Empire was both a single economic space, but a place with many nationalities who had their own
schools, their own sense of political representation. So it managed to kind of square this circle of like
unity and diversity that arguably, you know, foreshadowed the challenges of globalization like
80 years later. So that thing that Peter Thiel was talking about, how can you have a continually
interconnected economic space in which polities compete with each other, is kind of, you know,
some version of that was active in the kind of fragmented patchwork of something like the Habsburg Empire
and of course the Holy Roman Empire before that. So the people like Friedrich Hayek, like Ludwig von Mises,
who were socialized in that milieu, who saw the shattering of the world economy in the First World War,
were really kind of fixated on the question of like, how can you reassemble some version of that,
where people are happy culturally, they don't feel like they're being oppressed overly,
and they'll play along with the security of private property, you know, in any parts of the
space, they'll play along with the idea of labor competition. In the 1920s, things were going the
opposite direction, right? All of those countries that had been part of the Habsburg Empire, Czechoslovakia,
Hungary, were creating their own kind of mini manufacturing states, and they were nationalizing things, and
the categories of politics and economics had been kind of collapsed. The terms that I use in the book
to describe that is the ones they use themselves, which is the categories of imperium and dominium.
Yes. So in Roman law, and later international law, and for some of these neoliberals,
imperium is the rule of governments and of people. So you can think of states in the traditional sense
as kind of the space of imperium. But on the other hand, you have dominium, which is the rule of property
and things and ownership. And the challenge for neoliberals up across the 20th century and into the
21st, is like, how can you create states, imperium, who protect dominium, right? Who will not try to
interfere in the space of private ownership, private investment, private trade. So the vision that comes
out of this is one in which the world isn't kind of split north-south or east-west, but in which there's
a kind of a sphere of property sort of hovering over a sphere of government, and you try to sort of
reconcile conflicts between the two. So the Geneva School that you mentioned was these people from
Vienna, you know, often expelled after the Nazis rolled into town, and through the Anschluss between
Austria and Germany, moving to the center of what was then global governance, Geneva, Switzerland,
and trying to figure out what kind of institutions could kind of protect property rights and free trade
in a world after empire is starting to dissolve. So there we would normally think of the League of
Nations and the United Nations as kind of mostly representing national self-determination, the rights
of peoples, people speaking a certain language, ethnicity, having their own space. But they were sort
of asking, could these international institutions actually be used primarily for protecting like free
trade, private property, investor rights. Right. And that's the story that's told in the book then is
from the 20s up into the World Trade Organization in the 1990s, the sort of stepwise emergence of an
effective global economic governance infrastructure, which manages to kind of scale up that Habsburg model
by the end of the century to the scale of the planetary. So we're following this story over the course of,
let's say roughly a hundred years, we're watching the creation of international institutions. I think
a practical example of this is that if I, as an investor, put money into an oil drilling operation
in Venezuela, there are neoliberal international laws that will prevent that state from sending in
the army and taking my property. Yes. So it's like placing capital rights over state rights. And that,
you know, was relevant in the interwar period of places like Czechoslovakia, as I mentioned,
but it really became relevant after the second world war with the end of European overseas empires.
So the wave of decolonization that hits Africa and Asia in the 1950s and 60s and early 70s means that
you have all these new states that are like, great, we have independence. That means we can make use of
all of the resources within our borders, because that's what self-determination must mean. Right.
What else could autonomy mean if you can't, you know, use the copper underneath your,
underneath the surface of the earth and you can't use the oil in your fields.
Which would necessarily involve expropriation from the foreign investors.
It would, and it did. So in the 1960s and into the early 1970s, there were huge waves of expropriation.
Yeah. Of nationalization of foreign-owned entities, often extractive industries,
and then turning them into, you know, public ownership. Right.
And interestingly, that was not considered a taboo at the time. So as long as you gave just
compensation, that was considered to be kind of standard and acceptable practice.
Um, there was for the first couple of decades of the fifties and 1960s, a kind of norm by which indeed
political economy could translate into a certain amount of economic sovereignty over these kinds of
things. What happens in the 1970s, that's actually very important in a way, it's a kind of the pivot of
my book is the oil crisis and then the, something called the new international economic order. So the
nations of the UN, which had been, you know, the UN had been totally dominated by imperial
and European powers. As more and more nations became independent and entered the UN General
Assembly, they were able to use the UN as a kind of a, kind of a bully pulpit, but also a sort of a
platform for agenda setting and demands making that went against maybe the interests of the United States
and the European powers and even the Soviet Union. So the new international economic order in 1974
basically said, I think it's one of the most consequential, um, efforts to oppose the project
of neoliberalism across the 20th century, because you had a coalition of poorer nations, African,
Asian, and Latin American who said, you know what? Imperium actually trumps dominion. If our states,
often they were one party dictatorships at this point, but still, if our post-colonial states decide
they want to do certain things with their resources, then they should be able to. And international
global economic governance should not work just to enshrine property rights, but it should work to
stabilize commodity prices, create maybe even the space for colonial reparations, and allow sort of
technology transfer between poorer nations. So it was a really an attempt to kind of make global economic
governance something that could work for redistribution and like manifestly anti-neoliberal
terms. Oh, they must have loved that. I mean, it became, you know, neoliberals were just hitting the
big red panic button like in the 1970s. Yeah. It was like, oh no, this is not good. So the counter-revolution
against that was really what, um, accelerated and set into motion a lot of things to like roll back the
rights of nations to do what they will with their own resources. So the example you used
is, was kind of international investment law, which exists now is a great example of how we absolutely
don't and never have lived in a space of like unfettered markets. Actually, we have tens of
thousands of bilateral investment treaties, which nations sign between each other before rich nation
invests in a poor nation, which says exactly as you say, if over the next few years or in the
future, that nation does anything to kind of decrease the profitability of that investment,
then the poor, the poor nation can be sued by the rich nation or by the corporation itself that has
invested in a third party arbitration court, they can demand damages and they often have and do.
So the kind of possibility of an alternative modernity or an alternative form of globalization,
um, which we sometimes associate with like the nineties in opposition to the WTO,
was actually like a big global south led campaign in the 1970s that just got smashed with a sledgehammer.
There's a famous thought experiment around the financial crisis, which involves the total
number of countries in the world. And this then lays out some interesting implications for
governance and statecraft in the 21st century, particularly if you're concerned with wealth
preservation. Yeah. So this is the anecdote that I begin the book Crack Up Capitalism with is
Peter Thiel in 2009 speculating about how many polities there should be in the world. He sort of
says, how many do we have now pushing 200? Why can't we have more? Why can't we have a hundred? Why can't
we have a few thousand? And the idea was to produce a kind of competitive ecosystem of government the same
way that they felt they had created a new kind of set of disruptive, competitive platforms and service
providers in Silicon Valley. You've taken out legacy institutions of banks and journalism. Why not do that
now with the biggest kind of contract provider there is, which is government itself.
We are used to thinking of neoliberalism as a project that links a global society of free trade.
But the method for achieving that involves, I think, in the interim, this competitive patchwork
of special economic zones, of which I think there's something like 2,000 active SEZs.
Much, many more than that. There's over 5,000.
More than 2,000. 5,000. I'm out of date.
Peter Thiel is a perfect case in point, right? I mean, I begin the book with him in 2009 basically saying,
we need to start experimenting massively in the government space and we need to start getting out
of this place as soon as possible. But seven years later, he's speaking at the Republican National
Convention in support of a candidate operating with a more or less conventional model of representative
government. And he hasn't budged since, right? I mean, the point I make there is that it's much easier
to take over an existing state than to try to create one of your own. And if you've managed to
kind of bully and pressure the existing state into conforming itself to your needs, then voila.
Like why, why get out? Why exit now? So I think that it's cozy in here. You don't need to leave.
No, I mean, you can move around the country. I mean, we didn't talk about that, but you know,
there's still competitive jurisdictions state to state and the kind of taxes that different states
levy on their, on their residents. So hence Musk moving from California to Texas, like so many others.
But this fusion of private interests and service providers with the state is something that is,
I think, realizing the private state model by other means, right? You don't have to do a new
private state. You can simply privatize further the existing state. And that's something that
Musk arguably pioneered with SpaceX. I think that's, you know, underappreciated how important that is
for him as a kind of a spearhead of policy intervention. When he first tried to compete
to launch military satellites for NASA, he actually had to sue the U.S. government because they didn't
think that they needed to offer this to a private service provider. But within their own kind of
pecuniary laws, they actually did need to find the lowest cost, the cheapest provider. And so he was
able to win that first contract. Is this like the post office to space?
So now he is the one who puts up all their satellites and they can't do it without him.
I see.
So that's, you know, that's the trick here is like, make yourself indispensable to the sovereign,
right? And then, you know, talking about monarchic characters, I mean, Donald Trump is starting to get
there, right? In the sense that he seems to have an immunity to criticism for a majority of this
country almost, right? That he has, he exists in a kind of a stratosphere of exception that seems to
have transcended just the normal one of legal accountability and kind of electability. So,
you know, I think that all hail God, emperor Trump meme from 2016 was kind of on the money in certain ways.
So speaking of this period from the late 1970s to 1980s, we've covered a lot of territory. People
will talk about the election of Reagan in the US, Thatcher in the UK, the Volcker Shock, this moment
in which neoliberalism like starts as a historical era, as a period. But that's when they achieve power.
That's when they're actually enacting policy. They're in office and so on. Where should we properly
begin the story? Is it 1947? Is it the 1930s? Like, where do you start this history of neoliberalism?
Well, I mean, I think, you know, historians are famous for always saying like, well, to understand
that we need to step one step backwards. Of course.
So, I mean, for me, the existence of this kind of collective of people hashing out ideas in an unbroken
genealogy from 1937 onward makes it kind of a useful way to kind of bookend, all right, when did this idea of
neoliberalism come about? Because the neo part was the idea that sort of laissez-faire small state
liberalism of the 19th century in which the state just took care of kind of, you know, ideally the
night watchman state that just took care of like... This is classical liberalism. Classical liberalism.
They believe that was inadequate for an era of democracy because you couldn't anymore just, you know,
fire people on mass to bring your currency back up to parity with the gold standard the way you did
in the 19th century because they had votes and you'd get booted out of office next time.
So you needed to figure out a newly activist state designed to promote and protect competition
even under conditions of mass suffrage and eventually under conditions of global national
self-determination. So those are like the twin challenges that I see in the 20th century that were
quite unique which is like how do you protect capitalism and manifestly sort of a system that
produces inequality by its very nature under conditions of mass democracy and decolonization
in which there's a general trend towards a principle of equality and redistribution. So that takes a lot of
work actually and some of it is, you know, making people happy as consumers rather than as workers.
Some of it is distracting them with adventures overseas as with the Falkland wars in Thatcher's case,
which probably saved her premiership, you know, early in the tenure. The iron fist that goes along with
the free market's invisible hand is a big part of course histories of mass incarceration in a country
like the United States and a country like El Salvador right now. Darling of the free markets has just been
given a new big loan by the IMF has also imprisoned close to two percent of the adult population
thereby bringing the homicide rate way down but sort of at what cost? I mean he has an extraordinarily high
approval rating so he seems to be winning consent from Salvadorans but I think that when talking about
the protection of capital and property it's also important to see how you know methods of policing
incarceration especially obviously of people of African-American descent in this country are ways
of dealing with an economic problem where housing a surplus population but also producing you know
investable city centers and things like that for you know real estate interests. Yeah one of the
recurrent themes that you find with any of these like market ideology type people is that although they
talk about the efficiency of markets and allocating resources and so on there is always this negative
externality or something that needs to be excluded like you let a market run long enough and you just
inevitably find this extreme polarization and asymmetry of resources and so their commitment to using the
market to allocate resources means that you are at some point you're saddled with this problem of having
to get rid of the expendable people. Absolutely well that I think is the kind of the essence or what makes
this new kind of exitarian yeah strain going back to teal again kind of so symptomatic of this impasse
you're describing right because the the idea of exit is to you know have all the benefits with none of the
down downsides right I mean so rather than figuring out how you can create a large country like the United
States in which there's pockets of prosperity surrounded by like a hinterland of like precarity
or poverty and then just figure out how to keep the poor out of the pockets of prosperity and police
them away it's just like well what if we just took that pocket of prosperity and just relocated it outside
of the actual territory of the United States right and they look around the world for examples and
they see places like Dubai and Singapore I mean how do both those places work they work by importing a majority of
their residents as workers with zero rights and zero claims on anything resembling citizenship who are
in the case of Singapore and Dubai you know housed separately from the wealthy parts of the population
on a kind of hire and deport rotation in the case of Dubai often hardly paid or not paid at all through
these exploitative systems of the Khalifa labor system and those things that too sort of you know good
liberals look like downsides are to I think exeterians like the secret of their success so the secret is
is to create a situation which people don't have a platform upon which to make legitimate claims
right I mean if you are an American you can always stand up and say like this sucks this isn't what our
country is about we need to do better if you are an imported migrant worker in the model of the cruise ship
which is really the kind of prototype for exeterianism then if you say hey this sucks
I'm a part of this cruise ship too they just put you off to the next port and hire the next person
literally it was called project blue seed from the seasteading institute yeah they tried it on a cruise ship
yeah no absolutely there's a lot of that stuff and there's also really funny accounts of what happens
when this actually is tried in real life there's a great guardian piece called the about the SS Satoshi
which is great partially because it reveals that the fantasy of the sea as a kind of unregulated
space is far from it right it's actually dense with regulatory claims for international waters beyond
the power of nation states can't regulate them they can't touch you exactly that sort of hugo
gracious vision of the open law of the sea is actually true to some extent as far as passage but
all vessels need to somehow be anchored somewhere on land and you know when you need to come back to
like get you know food and fuel suddenly you're back in the kind of legal morass of the bad world as
they see it yeah so so yeah I think you know I look at these these far out anarcho-capitalists and
exeterians alongside like real world examples of models they're seeking to emulate right so I think
it's interesting inherently that someone like David Friedman Milton Friedman's son in the 1970s was
trying to figure out how you could privatize all services that states provide and create like a
totally opt-in contract-based society sort of taking the gated community as a model and then you know
maximizing that into an absolutely private um polity I think that's interesting David Friedman is
literally the author of anarcho-capitalism yeah yeah yeah the machinery of freedom is his most
important book but he also has written a couple fantasy novels if you want to check out salamander
then I encourage you to he's got an interesting hobby of larping as well literally cosplaying yeah
I mean not just that he was one of the kind of pioneers of the larp um cosplay movement in the
united states setting up an annual function in northern pennsylvania where people you know come and
put on the attire and in the extreme versions like himself you know make no reference to the modern
world use no modern amenities and act as if you are in his case a 13th century berber muslim priest so
that this would this would be really funny if these people weren't in charge of the world
well it's like it's a certain level of like radical revolutionary commitment yeah which I think anyone on
the left can kind of like laugh at at first but then kind of have a sinking feeling like how many of us
are actually going that far right right I mean how many people are like living their projected version
of what a good future could look like in such regularity as someone like that like putting in
the work organizing the other you know the larpers around him so I think that that convergence is really
it's happening in ways of just sending off so many sparks right now between sort of like wild
speculative fantasies often irrigated by science fiction gaming all kinds of non-embodied interaction
intersection of that with the kind of mainline policy ideas of what it means to be a good and
responsible state right it's not for nothing that the uk after brexit was basically looking at dubai and
saying like how can we do the emirates here in the uk yeah well we can create little pockets of
territory that strip out the regulations and laws but you're never going to compete with dubai right
I mean the fact of globalization is that you actually just end up debasing and degrading your own
already you know more abundant social democracy rather than coming anywhere close to that level of
being plugged into the circuitry or switchboard of global capitalism I want to talk about
exit and the zone and kind of this competition with social democracy which I think is immensely
important for the story uh but very quickly to comment on the kind of uh larping component here
patry friedman also uh grandson of milton friedman um son of david friedman there's kind of a lineage
here and a progression of this thought that grows increasingly radical one might say
i participated in a role play based in the discord of the seasteading institute of which patry friedman
was a co-founder yeah and there are just so many overlaps between this like cosplay larp
suspension of disbelief expansion of the political imagination it's a pretty powerful tool and these
people are meaningfully shaping policy decisions uh creating special economic zones yeah living out
this this fantasy and i wonder if this gives us some important context for how to understand the
crazy that people post on the internet nowadays right because very often i'll have conversations
with people and they'll say like ah these guys are just larpers they're just pretending they're doing
whatever and i don't know like there's billions of dollars i mean well literally uh trillions of
dollars i think 8.7 trillion dollars held in uh offshore tax havens these special economic zones are
shaping our political reality and they're being designed by people who literally dress up as
medieval characters like maybe larping is kind of important and we should pay attention to what these
people are saying online yeah um how do you how do you look at these people online who make these
radical posts that sometimes seem a bit like sensational or outrageous like when do we think
about taking them seriously yeah no i mean so i think the development of special economic zones you
know which is basically china imitating hong kong and turning shenzhen into what it is and then other
countries looking and saying how can we have our own shenzhen and creating these little pockets of
deregulation and you know friendliness to foreign investors i mean those have been in reality mostly kind
of used by states as forms of like you know incentivizing investment but some anarcho-capitalist
and libertarians have also certainly looked at those and said hmm what if we can design those a
little bit differently even paul romer who's no actual wild-eyed libertarian nobel prize-winning
economist was like what if special economic zone could be something that he called a charter city that
would basically be like a new colony whereby a rich country would sort of take over part of his
suggestion was turning guantanamo bay into a canadian governed sez and then that could blossom really
a new kind of hong kong okay um yeah he tried he literally went up to canada and tried to push that
up crazier things have been proposed he said we could even have mounties in in the in the caribbean
maybe a little hot i think with the hats and everything yeah no the the outfit is not it's not well
adapted but um so so there's that side of thing just sort of observing developments and sort of
extrapolating from them but then i think my approach kind of as an intellectual historian
isn't necessarily to focus too much on the people but to say sort of like what world made those people
possible do you know what i mean like to focus on everything that elon musk says for example is one
approach but the other approach is to say like what were the set of conditions that made him seem
credible and not only that but also the world's richest man and there i think i mean the best example
that people like balaji srinivasan use certainly is cryptocurrency balaji srinivasan is the author
of the network state the network state and um he says outright you know we larped a currency into
existence yeah so why can't we larp a state into existence and that only seems far-fetched until you
think about the fact that you know in 2016 when trump was elected the first time uh 700 was the cost of
a bitcoin and now it's a hundred thousand so there's good kind of tangible reasons why you could
say hey this thing that in their mind is functioning like money that is a kind of a fundamental part of
statecraft has been kind of radically rethought and and remade by us and we're still profiting massively
on the gains why can't we bring that uh approach and replicate it in fields of statecraft beyond just
payment systems so you know the world it's not just that they are they are looking at the world and
saying what if like the world has told them like you're right yeah yeah like the environment of like
infinite quantitative easing the environment of um you know incredibly frothy tech market in which a few
huge stocks like drive the whole the whole apparatus is not the fabulations of a couple of dudes in
silicon valley i mean that's pension funds that's you know that's people's moms and dads and aunts and
uncles who are you know trying to protect their retirement by investing in things that are having
good gains so the phenomenon i think of of this radicalization of neoliberalism into a kind of
exitarianism is a product of you know the world that we have all kind of collectively helped create
over the last 20 years and they're not so much kind of larping as just kind of realizing a potential
within it um and trying to find the moments where the friction appears when they seek to take the next
step and it hits some kind of obstacle is kind of the approach of crack up capitalism i mean here
it might be worth mentioning the example from honduras yeah where which many people might have heard
of but in the around the same time that teal was saying we need to um create thousands of new states
and paul romer was saying we need to create charter cities kind of neo-colonies there was a coup in
honduras and a very right-wing government came into power that was advised as they often are by a bunch of
hondurans who went to business school in the united states and they were never heard this one before
they were you know checking out roamer's ideas online and they were like we should do this let's
sell off parts of honduras's territory and turn them into these blank slate platforms for whatever
the investors want they'd been doing this for ages right there were tons of scz's and export processing
zones where canadian underwear manufacturers could come in and basically dictate the term so it wasn't that
different than what already existed but they said let's go a bit further let's give people the
right to make their own laws have their own police their own courts and in the first version that was
passed um enter into treaties with other nations as if they are nations so that was that's new yeah
that was the original proposal that had never been done before it was the closest to like a new private
state that we had seen um that got slightly watered down but in the meantime joe lonsdale patrie
friedman a bunch of other associated people got him michael strong who um was close with john mackie
the founder of whole foods um came in and started to invest and proposed that this place uh called
prospera which is a small part of an island called ruatan off the north coast of honduras in the caribbean
would become a place where people could do a bunch of things they weren't allowed to do in the united
states um unlicensed medical testing sort of offshore crypto stuff obviously um tourism is the
standard approach other things sort of undisclosed and um very high profile scott alexander endorsed
this said it was a great idea which i think also started unlock more vc investment pronomos capital
patrie friedman's um charter city startup society uh cap venture capital fund was directly involved
everything seemed to be going swimmingly from the point of view of the right-wing libertarians
but then there was an election and the woman who came into power was the wife of the person who had
been deposed in the previous coup and she kind of basically ran on like throw the gringos out like
this is a step too far our sovereignty is not for sale this is just repellent to the basic principles
of like national stuff if i remember there was a unanimous agreement among all of the parliament
in honduras like could you imagine any government anywhere where everyone agrees on something that
they want to get these people out right but here's the problem is this here's where encasement comes in
right because this had already been made part of the constitution so yes it could be pulled out but
there were some hurdles but more importantly and this is what had actually made people feel confident
about you know investing their money here honduras was the signee to a central american
free trade agreement which did exactly what we're talking about which is give investors the right
to sue states that break the terms of the original investment contract so suddenly now you know some of
people who are some of the wealthiest people in the world are suing one of the poorest countries in
the world to the tune of 11 billion dollars so this is a situation where you know the ideas and the
institutions start to come together right this is why i take an approach that isn't just like
parsing the texts but it also isn't just like following the frankly often really dry
history of like international economic law but the moments they intersect so like these far-flung
fantasies had now come down to earth and they started to bear fruit patrie friedman went down and
had his like tesla key you know implanted in his hand so he can open his car with a sweep of his palm
but now facing reality they immediately go crying bad libertarians that they are or honest libertarians
that they are straight to the institutions of state international law that they supposedly were out
there to exit from right right so that's the scale shift i think is really important to bear in mind is
like we're not just in a world of nation states on a kind of a checkerboard we're in a world where nations
have inside of them jurisdictions with different qualities different terms literally different laws
and then above that there are international economic institutions that you know usually are
there to protect more the rights of capital and investors than they are of average citizens and states
and in moments like this you see aha here's a short circuit between the kind of zone of exit and
the highest level of international economic law and the two are kind of both holding nation states in
a kind of a vice grip right right and saying certain things are possible the moment you try to do
that no democracy isn't operative anymore right right the states are kind of held hostage by capital
which is that if you don't meet our demands from within we will exit we built the infrastructure to
do it yeah um one of the one of the things that i want to explore a little bit further here we actually
and if i sorry if i can just add something to that because i think you put it very well that states
are kind of held hostage by international economic law and global financial markets yeah because what
the the fates of a poorer country rise and fall on its credit worthiness and its credit ranking and
it's sort of you know how it's how its credit is seen its debt is seen in global bond markets and
that's such a serious power that nations sort of agree in advance if they obey in advance to use the kind
of timothy snyder language about you know what we shouldn't do under fascist governments so someone
wrote in a really interesting book called why not default he was saying no there's all these
situations where default on your loans yeah why don't nations which are sovereign lenders
are sovereign borrowers at some point just say like sorry we're not paying you back yeah because
you see in the few instances where that happened those countries like argentina is one example were so
severely punished both by international economic institutions like the imf and by just private lenders
that it serves as like an example of what not to do so countries will preemptively cut their own
costs you know make painful reductions just to avoid the prospective um punishment that might come from
the global financial space president of argentina right now literally an anarcho-capitalist
so yeah yeah no i mean how the appearance of javier malay on the landscape is really one of those
validating moments for people who spend all their time it does mean something yeah for people who
are like always parsing these doctrines because half the time i'm like why am i even taking these
people seriously and then suddenly now you know like the head of state of one of the largest countries
in latin america is like well i see myself as more of a minarchist than an anarchist but i do follow
the work of rothbard in combination with the insights of muses i'm like oh my god it's not a 14 year
old teenager on reddit no yeah this is an adult man who's in charge you should do like a my political
journey with me i would love to yeah it's a wild and woolly ride and it's and it's about navigating
between the kind of like extreme market radicalism of hans herman hoppe and people like that on the one
hand and then the realities of international institutions on the other right so he is a master at
playing both sides i mean he goes to the world economic forum perfect example of the way that
neoliberal rhetoric works he stands up at the world economic forum in davos and says social democrats
christian democrats feminists climate activists populists they're all the same they're all our
enemies they're all collectivists and it's you in this room you're the value creators you're the ones
who are actually coming up with ideas in the world so we need to you know i want to applaud you all
you're the ones who make wealth and we need to like you know build a greater wall and bulwark against
the they're the ones who make it you can lay their own round of applause neil ferguson you know
respected historian of the world economy wrote a rave review of the speech so that idea of battle lines
that shift but also sort of maintain a certain consistency over time is you know well represented
by someone like him i think i want to try and thread a few things together here um we talked about
network states we brought up hoppe we've covered a little bit the hapsburg empire um this period in
let's say post-war where neoliberalism sets its sights on social democracy especially in europe there is a lot
of theorizing about creating these zones that you talk about a lot in crack up capitalism and this
begins what i would describe as an explicit project to create a patchwork of different tax havens that
can slowly drain the resources from social democratic countries bankrupt their welfare states and by doing
so they will be forced to meet the demands of these international institutions link everything into the
global market achieve neoliberal utopia and so on there's something now that has emerged in the
american political discourse that is i think very influential and significant called the new right
which contains a lot of different ideological elements among them are people who will talk about
creating an economic patchwork governed by benevolent ceo dictators and what we should have
is a monarch who's in charge of everything while we liquidate the rest of the world into competitive
markets that sounds a lot like neoliberalism too are those things different in any meaningful way is
this just the completion of this project to create this patchwork of different zones because it would
sound like the continuity of the last like 50 years is to do exactly that yeah no it's a great question
i mean i think that it's helpful to see the kind of slow demise of social democracy and the welfare state
as like partially being done the way you describe i think by like you know the production of race to the bottom
offshoring and outsourcing sites of competition and tax avoidance and so on that as you say kind of
drain or extract surplus from the fiscal coffers of the potential welfare state because of domiciling practices
of corporations just pretending they're in cayman islands when they're actually in the united states
and whatever i think though there's another project which is the european union which i think in some
ways is more consistent with what i described in globalists in other words it's not a project of exit
but it's or the construction of a galaxy of tax havens or offshore in a low-wage manufacturing sites but
it's a further layering of kind of encasing institutions over national sovereignties so
i think the eu is fascinating because it's very much a contested terrain so you had people in the
neoliberal camp who were like the eu is great we're doing like the what one of them called the ferrari model
of integration the what the ferrari model of integration okay we are like you know lifting barriers
to competition between states so countries can't protect their own markets we're setting up this
is really important the european court of justice which is like a judicial authority that sits with
above the nation states that can force nations to do things like you can't fund any more through state
aid this or that part of your manufacturing base that you find socially or politically important
um you need to allow competition so there was kind of uh a machinery of enforcing neoliberalism
that was part of the european project but at the same time there were people inside the european
project like let's do something different with that we've seen that more in the last couple of
years right like what if we have a more egalitarian eu in which there's transfers to poorer countries
in which you like regularize working conditions especially for women in which you can do big
investments into like breakthrough technologies for green transition and things like that so the eu
isn't just a neoliberal entity but it is contains one facet that i think is sort of like the globalist
institution building version of neoliberalism in miniature which is like you don't get out of states you
put something uh uh an encasement over top of them and and uh maybe important to mention that
the money supply for all of the member states of the eu is locked into brussels in which there is no
form for democratic input yeah into frankfurt the site of the european central bank yeah so you kind of
you hive off certain core state capacities to supranational authorities that you actually
can't really hold accountable often um and you kind of defer governance to elsewhere so that's you know
if you look at what someone like tony blair was saying in the 1990s or gerhard schroeder these are
social democrats these are socialists yeah yeah but they were the ones saying like listen states
we're weak now we're impotent we can't stand in the face of the storms of globalization
globalization is like the weather if that means that you know we're going to lose all of our
manufacturing jobs then let's just prepare for that outcome rather than try to push back against it
so that you know i think is the version of neoliberalism that we um have most ready to mind
and when i think someone like curtis yarvin or something says neoliberalism is cringe it's probably
what he's thinking of is like you know this this era where states kind of declared their own impotence
and supineness and sort of rolled over and said you know let global competition do with us what it
wants to and all politics is is like a selection of consumer preferences right the kind of coca
colonization model of what globalization and neoliberalism look like and so the more activist
version that you're describing this now coming the new right is kind of like no we want to in a way take
back control from globalization in the sense that we want to sort of determine through the design of our
our own enclaves and parts of the patchwork where we want to plug in do we want to be a financial
service provider do we want to be a place that does you know medical research do we want to be a
place that focuses on certain kinds of you know cultural production or news production um and in the
process you then have to rethink the principle upon which that space would be governed now that you've
if you've broken free from the kind of straitjacket of the existing nation state system
why should you still be beholden to ideas of one person one vote democracy as the kind of default
or kind of one ethnicity one language group as a default those seem like very old wilsonian
traditions by now um so then you say well what's what creates efficiency well ceos create efficiency
they have um the concentration of power in their hands they're accountable to a board of shareholders
and then people either take up their product or they don't and if they are wealthy enough then
they buy themselves into a position where they're large enough holder of stock that they can influence
the decision making of the ceo but there's a separation of kind of the allocation of resources
and kind of the direction of travel for the polity and the kind of everyday life of people who otherwise
just kind of live with the consequences and that is a singaporean model that again is like a dubai model
and those places especially dubai combine interestingly like a ceo model in which the person can be dismissed by
the board at will with a kind of a continuity principle of like bloodline in the case of dubai
where the shakes come from the al maktum dynasty and you can't get a shake from outside of that it
needs to be from within that and from the point of view of yarvin and hans herman hoppe that's good
because the time horizons of a monarch supposedly are longer than the time horizons of a ceo let alone a
four-year elected congressperson who's more concentrated on short-term maximization of their
own you know gains from that time in office whereas a king in their understanding is like interested in
the kind of their progeny and the kind of like the long-term outlook for caretaking the resources under
their control so i agree with you that that is a kind of new variation on the old neoliberal idea
which says that you know governance is about stability capital security and economic freedom
over political freedom instead of trying to figure out how you can monkey with institutions to make
that idea square with the idea of democracy which is not necessarily the same which has been the
problem for the 20th century right 21st century thing is just like oh just get rid of that left hand
part right and just focus on the efficiency economic freedom part and take people with
you who are into it and then open the door under conditions for people who might be interested as
well but don't offer any birthright sort of you know ability to enter without uh admission fees or
something i want to spend a moment on this topic of monarchy because i feel like this is one of the
hairpin turns in this story that takes people by surprise because we're used to talking about
you know individualist libertarians whatever they're very anti-dictator anti-state right and
the idea that they would maybe prefer to live under an absolute monarch is a little bit of a strange
idea they generally describe this as a ceo dictator uh we spend a lot of time on this show talking about
speculative models of governance in the 21st century and it seems to be uh you gave the example of dubai
we've talked about china a little bit but both of these environments while they're very different have
an extreme concentration of wealth among their capitalist class they have an enormous amount of
power invested in one individual and then they have this kind of competitive patchwork of different
regulatory zones in which there's financial services and there's manufacturing and things like this
and you kind of recreate that hapsburg empire which has inspired so many of these people so
can we maybe explore a little bit of hoppe's work and how he makes that argument that persuades people
who are of this libertarian mindset to embrace the idea of having a king so that's a very bizarre
political evolution it is in the 21st century arguably but even across the 20th it wouldn't have been
seen as that weird right so look at the hapsburg empire i mean it was an empire meaning there was an
emperor literally there was literally an emperor and there's really interesting work by intellectual
historians who says it was actually precisely um these kind of liberal often jewish for important
reasons i'll get to uh intellectuals who were actually very supportive of the empire as such
so they are supportive of this combination of like dynastic political rule on the one hand
and then relatively liberal economic policies on the other right why because they felt like
the emperor franz josef the second in this case was able to actually protect the rights of extreme
minorities in ways that a democratically elected leader might not be able to so if as in post uh
first world war hungary or czechoslovakia if you need to prove your like slavic ancestry or magyar
ancestry then what happens to people who don't fit specifically jews right um so it made sense for people
from like a very uh small community to kind of take flight in a relatively neutral um pragmatic
universalist position of someone like no no the all of the peoples are my children or whatever
um so that was actually not paradoxical um people like i mean hayek added the vaughn to his name
you know as part of this ennoblement process that his parents and others had gone through because they
saw their interest reflected in a kind of combination of you know imperial liberalism
after the second world war is another good example so you think about who were the kind of
success stories of post-1945 one of the first one that comes to mind is japan but why then did the
united states you know let the emperor persist as the head of state nominally in japan even though
wasn't he the one that everyone was like committing kamikaze acts in the name of and so on right
because they also even american post-war planners were like a certain level of social stability is
provided by this symbolic figurehead which can serve a kind of cohesion function can buy legitimacy and
consent that can allow a more disruptive process of economic modernization to happen at the same time
right um this is a whole category of like of discussions in development economics in the 1960s
is about developmental dictatorships um saudi arabia another great example um iran under the shah same
thing globalizing plugging into world oil markets under the leadership of a dynastic figurehead who was
preferable than the democratically elected mohammed mosaddegh who the americans helped you know coup to
get the shah in power um so i think that that you know there is a there is a tradition and a history for
that and i think it helps to sort of make us see what the kind of um balance is that many of these
especially anarcho-libertarians want to strike between unleashed economic competition or institutionalized
economic competition and authoritarian rule that makes the latter possible yeah uh the former
possible so for good reason there's been a lot of attention to the kind of stuff that murray rothbart
was saying in the 1990s and john gans has written about this i've been writing about it for years as
well um his kind of plan for uh the day after so to speak watching the soviet union in a period of shock
therapy was very inspirational for people like murray rothbart and lou rockwell who helped start
the mises institute they're like okay what do we need to do you know free prices smash the unions
unleash the cops is one of the first things he mentions you know get rid of the bums and the
vagrants so there will be a kind of a very disruptive transitional period in the move from a kind of
mixed economy model to what they hoped would be a totally anarcho-capitalist like pay-for-use style model
so you can see that two ways i think and i think this is true of hoppe and mille too of yarvin as
well yeah which is that okay maybe this is just a functional kind of a bloodless but practical
attitude towards restoring order and stability or you can see that there is a kind of a libidinal
sadistic desire laying not really under the surface at the surface that's part of that so it's not just
you know unfortunately we have to like smash the union so that we can and the protesters and the
gender activists so that we can you know become more credit worthy in global markets in argentina
but no we actually want to smash right the protesters and the activists like that will be pleasurable for
us yeah and part of what we're in this for is that act that cathartic act of like the unleashing of
violence so i think that's um you know that's more like where the similarities between fascism and
extreme anarcho-libertarian capitalism starts to resemble one another too because if neoliberalism has
always understood itself in opposition to some kind of opponent i mean so did fascism i mean fascism's
primary opponent was communism much you know to the opposition of what the head for the afd said on
musk's stream the other day but so fascism was defined as the desire to you know reassert
masculine power crack the heads of these reds and you know bring order back and i think a lot of
anarcho-capitalist sort of fervor and glee often comes to from that kind of that idea of helicopter
drops and kind of pinochet maybe as the preeminent example of this yeah yeah who isn't a very good
model once again if you're actually an anarcho-capitalist because he did all kinds of like
state intervention especially in the short term but he did get the murder of socialist right and
i think that's you know worth a lot that's what really matters as long as we're getting that we
can do a little bit of state spending on the side yeah i mean yarvin i yarvin is an interesting one
right because there has been a fair amount of writing about him in which things that he pretty clearly
meant satirically or meant in the spirit of exaggeration have been taken as you know his
outright belief so but that's what makes this territory so interesting is that the guys who
are making the laws for the new society are also doing the role plays and it's hard to tell what is
real and you know what are they going to enact and what was meant as exaggeration or satire yeah
like where does it's the same problem as memes yeah it's like when does posting end and policy begin
right right and musk is obviously presenting us that problem a little more i think he's intentionally
muddying the waters actually he's like he's trying to keep us on our toes and guessing i mean i think
you know if you see musk as like a king-like figure inside of this and he's clearly doing his
best to produce like a progeny um that could be his dynasty uh not for nothing i have this side
theory about the fact that most of his children have been born by ivf which means that you can do
sex selection of the embryos that you implant which makes it a bit more understandable why 12 of
12 of the children born to his partners have been male at birth he needs a male heir to assume the
crown yeah so so you so here's the thing right it's like not only distinguishing the line between
shitposting and policy that's one challenge but the the time frame under which these people operate so
it's part of must sort of stock and trade to describe himself as like a long-termist right
everything he does is for the his the safety and the well-being of human civilization whether it's
voting for trump buying twitter having a bunch of kids um and that often again gets repeated as if
it's a truism that we can take him at his word he's actually trying to create a multi-planetary
civilization as fanciful as that might sound um and yet you know he is a creature of short-termism
in fact right like he is someone who has come to the position of power and wealth that he's in
because of a sense of you know the the pump cycles inside of hype stocks and the ability to sort of like
produce momentum that becomes undeniable for people who are just being prudent kind of money managers
and it's not at all about a thousand years hence and let alone colonizing mars um but it's just about
like holding until the price is right and dumping so you know he is actually like the consummate
short-termist and i think that's true of a lot of the tech right guys right i mean i take with an
enormous grain of salt the idea that they're actually interested in safeguarding the history
the future of humanity i mean they're extending their own lives as much as possible because that's
really the only thing that matters is their own life on this earth yeah the transhumanism stuff
is uh that's a whole other podcast but this is actually very influential this life preservation
uh overlaps with a lot of the tech circles but on this topic of tech uh patrie freeman is probably
the biggest proponent of this but discussing terms of service and uh voluntarily joining something that
is run by a ceo dictator sounds a lot like the social media platforms that we use today
elon musk is uh he's talked extensively about integrating uh payments these platforms may
have their own forms of currency soon they have forms of identification they assume more and more
uh the traditional responsibilities and roles of the state as those structures wither uh and we see
this kind of sprouting or flourishing of non-contiguous economic zones should we take these ideas of
network states opting into governance that's maybe on blockchain or in the cloud should we take those
things as serious proposals well i think you know part of it rests on this verb you use of wither like
the states are withering i would say that they are you know they are contracting these private service
providers to provide the things that states used to offer right so that's actually what's happening is
i think it's much more likely that private actors will continue to take on more and more state
functions until it's difficult to find the difference between the u.s state and private silicon valley
it's great when the money printer works for you absolutely and it doesn't go to anybody else and
they just pay you that's great and we have a prototype for that right i mean that is alipay and we and
we chat and we pay in china so that's a model of state capitalism which is not only exists but has
proven to be you know not the problem with the economic model of china right that's about the
frontiers of real real estate speculation but i think the core here is something you mentioned
earlier which is like one thing that this flight to special economic zones does it isn't necessarily
directly drain the coffers in a kind of a mechanical sense such that the welfare state automatically kind
of collapses it produces a competitive pressure on those home states to adjust their own policies
again preemptively because the goal posts have been moved about what it means to tax a corporation for
example i mean i remember at some point during the trump administration the heritage foundation or alex
circulating this uh bar graph that showed corporate tax rates and it was like here's the us and it was
35 or something at that point um and here's like mauritius that was like eight percent or something and
like how can this be true how can this third world country have a lower corporate tax rate which is just
like a mind-bending leap of logic right like the idea that the biggest economy in the world should somehow
be compelled to follow lockstep with like an obviously engineered tax haven is doing to draw
profits away and yet that was being presented as common sense so that idea of you know using the
threat of exit to discipline the kind of incumbent i think is more what's happening here
there's a retreat from globalization there's a interventionist hand in the economy inflation
reduction act chips act a number of pieces of legislation from the biden administration that
just look very uncharacteristic of the neoliberal period i have limited faith that trump is going to
do anything like that but are we at some new chapter of this development is neoliberalism over is it in
a new iteration now or how do we understand these recent developments yeah yeah i mean that was a
question i was being asked a lot in the first year or so of the biden administration for good reason
right i mean the the containment efforts of covet for covet 19 you know did things policy wise that
definitely nobody thought could be done yeah um you know as far as shutting down the global economy
and yet preventing it from collapsing through you know furlough schemes and cash transfers and sort of
tax relief for affected companies um the effects of that were also quite interesting in terms of
political experimentation i was i wrote at the time about the kind of cracking up of even the territorial
lower 48 us into like state compacts right like there's like the new england compact was like a cluster
of states that had a certain arrangement among themselves for distributing ppe for stopping people
who were crossing uh you know i knew someone who was living in new rochelle early in the pandemic and
she couldn't leave town and people couldn't enter um so it turns out that the imperium to go back to
the category we're talking about like the power of the state actually you know was much stronger maybe
like this idea of like a surrender to globalization and the market you know what are governments anymore
they're just you know supine actors turns out like oh no like in extremists states will show up
and they can do things that nobody thought that they could do surprise surprise it's been that way the
whole time yeah no exactly yeah and so that lots of light bulbs were going off in the heads of people
of all points on the political spectrum right i mean people like synovasian were like amazing
sovereignty is provisional like it can be fragmented like at a top of a hat in the right conditions
people like um andreas malm the climate marxist was like this is great this is like war communism just
the same way that the soviet union came into existence in the course of the first world war
unexpected unprecedented shock from outside that then changed the terms for people in terms of their
relationship the government let's do that like let's roll out like shock communism like right now
um the very much in between the two moderate version that came out after biden's election
was the green new deal proposition build back better which was then further watered down after
opposition of course from mansion and cinema and so on to the investment reduction act which was still
a massive spending package designed to transform the american economy re-industrialize parts of it push
it on a trajectory towards energy transition and decarbonization
um so to talk about post-neoliberalism in 2021 was i think not that far-fetched at a rhetorical level
we were there yeah i mean the biden right cabinet and its economic advisors none of those kind of uh
shibboleths about the need to bow down to the natural qualities of global competition were there
is the option right katherine tye the u.s trade representative was one of the more overt in her
belief that states had made globalization and now they can remake it in a way that's more equitable
what that actually ended up meaning though is that in the attempt to realize that post-neoliberal
transition we ended up seeing many of the built-in aspects of neoliberalism as kind of state legal
hardware that made that such a transition impossible or hard to do so how did the ira get rolled out it was
basically through um large asset managers like blackrock you know stepping in as the kind of
backers for now what are seen as more um safe investments in things like green energy through you
know corporate uh you know state handovers to corporate investors in different parts of the united
states for solar farms wind farms whatever so it still kind of looked like public private partnerships
socializing risk privatizing profit for all of the ways that it seemed to transcend neoliberalism
it still had to exist inside of the like matrix of neoliberalism that had been built over decades
so when people started to question it um and feel skeptical about the arrival of a new era you know they had
reason to and now with the new trump administration we'll see how easily it is to just roll back all
of those things and to you know max out only sort of lng and and fracking projects scrap solar scrap wind
um and you know get back to kind of growthism for its own sake so i think that if you think about
neoliberalism first as fending off opponents of an economic freedom first competition focused
inequality dependent model of organizing capitalism then it's alive and well yeah the way it's organizing
global trade policy in particular throws some things into question but not all i think i think
it's not right it's not right to see any moves towards protectionism or tariffs as the opposite of
neoliberalism right um reagan used tariffs and voluntary export restraints and all kinds of quotas
to bully japan into opening their market for american semiconductors it's called competitive
liberalization the way that trump talks about using tariffs now is like you crack open europe to
american weapon systems american lng this is not anti-neoliberal right it's it's showing more kind
of the the strong hand of the state in pressuring countries into being exposed to market competition
but the outcome in the end is still i think you know a kind of a zero sum um accrual of profits to
some countries and some elites and and not others so it's a transformation or a mutation
i think rather than a reversal or a death quinn thank you so much for talking with us today your
work is an inspiration your research is so immensely valuable these are quite literally the most important
conversations and topics to talk about so i'm so glad to chat with you today globalists crack up
capitalism immense fan of your writing thank you so much for joining us thank you it was my pleasure
