Welcome everyone to the lectern. I'm very excited about this conversation I'm going to have
with Professor Philip Goff. I met Phil at two conferences. One was on the nature of wisdom
and then the second was on the nature of consciousness. And we hit it off and we found
there was a connection between us. And then I found out about Phil's book. I recommend his work
on consciousness. He has a position that I'm philosophically opposed to, but I do think
I can say this. I take Phil to be the best representative of panpsychism out there.
And I take his position and the way he defends it very seriously in the work I and Greg Enriquez
are doing on consciousness. So I highly recommend that work. I think there's a lot of bad forms of
panpsychism poorly argued for. That is not the case with Phil's work. We might get into consciousness
a lot later or maybe not. We'll see. Because what I want to talk to Phil about is a book that
intersects, I think, very deeply with a lot of my work. And it is this wonderful book. I'm reading
it right now. I have not read it all. So Phil will help me have a bit of a disadvantage, but I am
getting into it. I'm getting the arguments. Why? The purpose of the universe. And it really goes
towards things that I consider near and dear to my heart, which is, you know, that human beings have
a need to be connected in a way that we call meaningful. It's not obviously the meaning of a
sentence. It's a different kind of meaning. It's an existential meaning. And this is intimately bound
up with our fundamental worldview, our fundamental ontology, which means our fundamental account,
either implicit or explicit, of how we think reality is structured and how we might or might not belong
in that structure as the kind of beings that seek meaning the way we do. And so Phil comes from the
right side of the tracks. He's definitely an excellent philosopher, an excellent cognitive scientist.
And I think this is a well-written book. I want to frame this the way Phil does in his book.
This book is written for the same kind of audience that my book, Awakening from the Meaning Crisis,
was written for. It's not intended to be read only by academics. Phil agrees with me that on some of
these topics, we have to stop just talking to each other. We have to talk to a broader audience. But
nevertheless, he's also, as I tried to do, trying to keep towards a standard of rigor that at least would
be acceptable to academics and at least provoke them to drill down more deeply into more technical
arguments that could be found elsewhere. And so we're going to try and keep the discussion to exactly
that format. We're going to talk to people who are not necessarily in the professional business of
this, but like many human beings have a ongoing existential question about the meaning of their
lives. So, Phil, welcome very much to have you here. I'm so glad you reached out to me. I know I sort
of mentioned it informally when we were at the Wonderstruck conference. And then you reached out to me
and said, hey, let's actually do this, John. And I said, of course, let's do this. So why don't you tell
us a little bit more about yourself, a little bit of your professional background, and then a little
bit about what led you to write this book and how it might intersect with the work I'm doing
and why we're here together. Thanks, John. It's great to be here chatting to you. You're doing some
really, really interesting stuff on this in this series. And it's great to be able to be a part of
it and explore some of these connections. So I'm a philosophy professor at Durham University in the
cold north of England. I guess I'm interested in big fundamental questions about the nature of reality.
I'm kind of burning with curiosity about what the world is really like, or at least to have our best
guess at it. I've focused mostly on questions of consciousness, how consciousness fits into our
scientific story of reality. And as you mentioned there, I've defended a slightly strange sounding view,
panpsychism, which is roughly the view that consciousness goes all the way down to the
fundamental building blocks of reality, that maybe electrons and quarks have incredibly simple forms
of conscious experience, and that the very complex experience of the human or animal brain is somehow
built up from these simpler forms of consciousness at the level of physics. This is a view that was
laughed at insofar as it was thought about at all in recent history. But in the last 10 or 15 years
in academic philosophy and in certain bits of neuroscience as well, it's become still a minority
view, but taken much more seriously. And many people see it as, although it's a bit strange sounding,
an attractive middle way between the more traditional options of, on the one hand,
consciousness being in the soul, outside of the body and the brain, or the other hand,
it just being electrochemical signaling, and that's all there is to it. Some people see panpsychism as
a kind of attractive middle way option. So yeah, my book, I guess, Galileo's Era was my book aimed at a
general audience, trying to get these ideas on consciousness and panpsychism out to a broader
audience. My more recent book, modestly titled Why the Purpose of the Universe, you know, five years ago,
I honestly never would have imagined I'd be writing a book about the purpose of the universe. It really
has been sort of following the arguments where they lead. You know, I was raised Catholic, actually,
a very vibrant Catholic church in Liverpool. But I rejected that when I was 14. I refused to get
confirmed, upset my grandmother. I think she forgave me eventually. And then I, you know, I didn't have
much to do with this whole thing for 20 years. And didn't really feel there was a kind of God-shaped
hole in my life or anything. I guess I've always considered myself a spiritual person. But thought
of spirituality in my own terms, you know, through meditation, engaging with nature, art, and so on.
I guess I was in the growing spiritual but not religious classification. And this just actually
started to change when I came to my current university, Durham University, and started teaching
philosophy of religion. And it was a standard Western philosophy of religion because, you know,
you teach the arguments against God, you teach the arguments for God, students have got to make
their minds up and write their essay. So, you know, I taught the arguments against God based on the
challenges of why would a loving God allow the terrible suffering we see in the world? And I thought,
yeah, very convincing, definitely no God. But then I taught the arguments for God,
and to my surprise, found some of these quite compelling too. In particular, the argument
from the fine tuning of physics for life, this surprising discovery of recent decades that for
life to be possible, many numbers in fundamental physics had to fall in a certain very narrow range
in such a way that it looks incredibly improbable that a universe like ours would have the right
numbers for life just by chance. So this left me in a kind of, you know, philosophy for me is not
just abstract intellectual questions. You know, I, I live it out. If I can't work out what I think
about something, I can't bloody sleep, you know? So this really terrorized me with these arguments for
God and against God pulling me in separate directions. Um, and like, you know, I think so
many in the West think you do face this choice, right? Do you believe in the very traditional idea
of God, all knowing, all powerful, perfectly good, or are you a secular atheist? You know, it's like,
whose side are you on? Richard Dawkins or the Pope? Make your mind up. Come on, which team are you on?
And so I was, I really wrestled with this for a good couple of months, I think. And then I just had a,
a Eureka moment that I realized actually these arguments that I was impressed by are not actually
pushing in opposite directions. The, the arguments against God are arguments against a very particular
form of God. What, what philosophers sometimes call the omni God, all knowing, all powerful,
perfectly good, omnipotent, omniscient, omni benevolent. Whereas the arguments for God,
or at least the arguments for God, I like, like the fine tuning argument are arguments for something
much more generic, some, something God-ish, some kind of goal directedness in the early universe.
So if you go for something God-ish, but not God, then you can have your cake and eat it, right?
Everyone's a winner, you can accept both of these arguments. And so, five years later, this is really
what led to this book Why, where it's saying, look, both sides of this never-ending debate get
something right and something wrong. And what we've been neglecting is this, the range of middle-way
options in between where we can make sense that there's some kind of purpose or goal directedness
in the universe, but in the absence of the very, very traditional idea of a supernatural, powerful God.
So most of the book is bringing this to, I guess, the connection with you, John, I think most of the book is
just the, the cold-blooded scientific philosophical argument that we need to take this seriously.
And just to add, I think, you know, like with the fine tuning, I am more and more inclined to think
we're ignoring it for cultural reasons. You know, we've just got so used to the idea
that our science has ruled out anything like that. Um, I think it's a little bit like in, in the,
when we first got evidence that we were in, we weren't in the center of the universe and people
struggled to accept that, you know, because it didn't fit with the picture of reality they got used
to. And now we sort of laugh at those people, you know, stupid religious people. Why didn't they just
follow the evidence? But every generation absorbs a worldview it can't see beyond. Yeah. And I think
something like that's going on with, with this evidence for cosmic purpose that we're seeing in
science right now. I think future historians will look back and think, why do people ignore that
for so long? But so most of it's the, the cold-blooded argument, but in the final chapter, I explore
what implications this might have for human meaning, human purpose, connecting to many of the issues
you yourself, John, have, have explored so well. Um, and just to, just to, to, to basically give my,
my first position on that, I, I suppose, well, maybe we could get into the discussion and,
uh, and see where that goes, but I think at least in principle, these things can have very deep
implications for how we think about the meaning and purpose of our lives. Excellent. Uh, that was
fantastic, Phil. Thank you. Um, I'm very attracted to the goddess argument, if I can use your term. Um,
I often call that the sacred, uh, term sort of used to point to that within anthropology,
right? And the cognitive science of religion, um, uh, where the idea is not the three omnis,
but the three T's. Um, it's, it's trend, it, it is, um, the really real for people. Um, and then it's,
uh, it, it, it, it gives them, uh, an overarching orientation, a north star for their existence.
And it is the affordance of some of the most comprehensive and long-term transformations in
their lives. And so the sacred is that triple transcendent, the, the really real, the really
orienting and the really transformative. If I can make that a little bit more simplistic. Um, and,
um, and that means, uh, we're not just talking about some ontological claim. We're talking about
like how it, how it meets this need, uh, for, uh, transformation, connectedness to reality,
orientation, uh, that people long for.
So, um, I tend to use the sacred cause that way we can keep the two poles together. There's something
God-ish, uh, but it also people seem to relate to it reliably cross historically, cross culturally
as sacred. Um, so I, I, I don't know if that lands for you, but that's, that's how I've been trying to,
to wrestle with it.
That is a very, very nice way of articulating it. I like the term, uh, the sacred, as I sometimes say,
the transcendent. I like William James, the great, I bloody love one of my intellectual heroes,
William James, the great 19th century.
Great. Yeah. But he's a cognitive scientist, right? Cause he's both a philosopher and a
psychologist.
Of course. Yeah. Yeah. And, um, his term, the more he took, M-O-R-E talked about the more.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And look, I think this is a growing group, the spiritual, but not religious.
And, you know, so many people I talk to you say, oh, do you believe in God? That's,
I don't believe in God, but I believe in something. I believe in a higher power. People often say,
and there, you know, I feel like in general academics are not catering for that group.
And therefore we get this sense that it's, oh, it's just fluffy thinking. It's not very rigorous.
But I just think that is maybe a contingent circumstance that academics until fairly recently
have not been engaging with the intellectual foundations of these topics. Um, and that's
something I'm, I'm very much engaged with at the moment. I've got a three year Templeton project on,
discussions of panpsychism in philosophy of mind, and discussions of pantheism or panentheism in
philosophy of religion, these alternative conceptions of God, where God is not
wholly distinct from the universe, where God is somehow more interconnected with overlaps with maybe
even identical with the universe. And, you know, I think if we can spend more time, as you're doing, John,
you know, in a really rich way, um, building the intellectual foundations, you know, in my field,
um, most analytic philosophers are kind of secular atheists. There's some very good philosophy of
religion, but it's almost entirely very traditional Christians. Now, I, I don't have an issue. I don't
have a problem with traditional Christians. There's some really good work there. But it would just be
nice if there was a bit more variety, a bit more alternative versions of Christianity and alternative
forms of spirituality that go beyond Christianity. And, um, I think this is what we're starting to see.
And I think there's a real yearning out there with the public for, for this kind of material.
Excellent. I agree. I mean, um, I, maybe I'm one of the academics, the exception that proves the rule.
I've been teaching about this stuff in academia at the University of Toronto, uh, for about 20 years.
And I, and, and I did that because precisely when I talk about these topics, that's when my students
get most deeply engaged and they, they find my work life transforming. I mean, that's how I was
one of the life transforming philosophers kind of thing. I don't think it's me. I think that I've hit
a particularly important nerve in the culture that's not being addressed well by sort of standard
academia. Um, so this is great. And so let's, let's maybe talk about both of these sides, but
we'll talk, we'll talk about them sequentially, even though we agree that maybe they should be kept
together. I'll, I'll call one the ontological where we're right. When we're talking about the
goddess and I'll talk to call the other, the existential, uh, uh, meeting it in the term of
the existential philosophers, not how we people use it now to talk about something that might wipe out all of
humanity or something like that. So other people have come to similar, but maybe different conclusions.
And I want to put that out to you. I'll do, uh, uh, sort of John Hicks and then my take on it.
Um, and cause it, and these three positions are near each other. Wittgenstein might say they have a
family resemblance, but so Hick says, um, he comes to the same sort of conclusion that you do in his book,
the interpretation of religion and also the fifth dimension. He says, look, both sides have great
arguments. And then he does what he calls his meta argument. He says, that means that the universe is
in some sense, spiritually ambiguous. Um, and I, is it Pascal who said somewhere, uh, there's too much to
doubt and not enough to believe. Um, um, um, and, and now he doesn't conclude that that means there's
sort of nothing. What he concludes is that the really real can be equally represented by personal
sort of metaphors or icons and also impersonal, um, ones like the Tao or Sunyata or Brahman.
Right. Um, and, um, to my mind, that means that his position is, uh, more towards what,
uh, I'm going to have to use a term and then, sorry, Phil, I'll need a bit because I want to explain
how I'm using it. Um, where many people are talking about being non-theists and a non-theist is someone
who, um, well, let, let, let's, let's make use of Sheldon, uh, Berg's stuff. Um, you know, the,
the atheist philosopher in Canada, by the way, yay. Um, he, you know, he says, there's,
there's this transcendence. And when you get the three, that's what I'm calling the sacred,
you know, the most real, the most orienting, uh, the most transformative. Right. And then you have,
what kind of description do you think is appropriate for it? Do you think there is
a sort of complete and authorized, uh, description or conception of it that we have to adhere to?
Uh, and all other conceptions are fundamentally mistaken
in some ways. So he calls, uh, that a strong conception. And then you can have a weak conception
is now we might need a multiple of these and our relationship to them is more imaginal.
There are different ways of trying to pick up on this. Right. And it's more,
a much more open-ended. He calls that a weak conception. And so using that framework, I would
say that theism is, uh, the claim that there is strong transcendence. There's a sacred and that
there's a strong, uh, conception of it. One that we should have, we should think of God this way.
Right. Or we should even think of ultimate reality as God, perhaps even to make it more contentious.
Um, the atheist agrees that that is the appropriate description for the sacred, but there is no such
thing. Right. And so most of the arguments that Dawkins makes and others are against that conception
of the sacred, the God conception, not the God-ish, the God. Um, and then he advocates for something that
I think is, um, uh, in between those two, which I call non-theism, which is what we need is a weak
conception of sacredness. There is sacredness, but we need a weak conception of it, uh, because
we need to learn a lot more. His primary thesis is we're, we're probably spiritually immature because
we've, we've only been doing this stuff for about, you know, 40,000 years max. Right. Um,
and so we need an orientation that will allow us to go through radical transformation,
really provocative learning if we're going to get, um, that connection to the sacred that we want. So we need
a thin conception of a triply transcendent sacred. And that's, I would call that a non-theistic
position. Now I needed to explain it that way because non-theism is sometimes used as a synonym
for atheism. And I think that's the loss of a valuable distinction. Um, and so I think Hicks and
the argument I'm making point towards a kind of non-theism. So now I can ask you my question.
Is your goddess non-theistic in that sense? Does that track for you? Uh, like, so maybe answer on
both sides. You sort of like the sacred. Do you think our conception of it should be thick
or, or, or, or thin? And I said weak earlier, I meant thin. Should it be thick or, or a thin conception?
What, uh, what, what, what, how do you answer that open question now?
That was, that was absolutely fascinating. I was enjoying listening to that. Let me, let me just
quickly say two things about two people. You mentioned that starting off with John Hick,
my first job as a, as a lecturer when I was 28 in Birmingham university. And in my first couple of
weeks at the privilege of giving a talk in John Hicks front room, he used to have this weekly meeting
where people would give, would give, would give talks. Excellent. And, um, he was a really lovely
person. Um, he was supervise, he was supervisor for William Lane Craig, the very traditional
Christian philosopher who's very different in many ways. Um, but also John Schellenberg was in Durham
for my conference last weekend. Oh, wow. We, well, I was thinking of this when we were talking a
moment ago. So I, I, this project, which is trying to inculcate more, I guess you could say liberal
philosophy of religion and, and there have been pioneers yourself, John have been pioneers of this
for a long time. So I thought I'd invite two of the fathers of this in my mind. And one was John
Schellenberg, whose position you very nicely articulated there. And also another one you might not have heard
of Tim Mulgan who has defended this view, which he calls an anthropic purpose of ISM, where there is
a purpose to the universe, but it's nothing to do with us. We're an accidental, we're an accidental
by-product. And so this is, again, he's motivated by the arguments on both sides are good. And, and it
was just wonderful connecting these two towering figures in my mind when nobody else was doing this
stuff with, um, newer generations. Um, so which, which, how do I understand the more or the sacred?
Well, I can answer that in two ways in the, in the why book, I'm not trying to pin down a definite view.
I'm trying to open a conversation. I'm trying to get people going, thinking about this. I explore
three possibilities in great detail in the book. Uh, one, perhaps the most kind of straightforward
is just a non-standard designer, right? So like the traditional God, but tweaked a bit, you know?
So the one I like best is, um, a God of limited power, something John Stuart Mill took very seriously,
in fact. So maybe God just can't create intelligent life in an instant. Maybe the only way God can
create intelligent life is by creating a universe from a singularity, but the right physics that will
eventually evolve intelligent life. And God's like, I know it's going to be messy. I'm sorry. You know,
this is all I could do is this or nothing. So that's one possibility I take very seriously. Um,
but it's not obvious that does need to be, um, so I think there's evidence for goal directedness and
purpose in some sense, but maybe that doesn't need to be a mind underlying that the great Thomas
Nagel defended in his incredibly controversial book at the time in 2012, mine and cosmos, the idea that
there could be just purposeful laws of nature, laws of nature with goals built into them that direct the
universe to certain goals. And actually some of our best philosophers have, I've managed to make very,
very rigorous, precise account of, of such laws. Uh, so it is something if, if you get a bit nervous
about God, I just want some laws of nature. There is a kind of rigorous way of making this a sort of
more normal standard scientific hypothesis. Um, just slight digression.
Nagel was absolutely hammered very unfairly in reviews for that book. Now my own book,
I do not think is a better book. I do not think I'm a better philosopher, Thomas Nagel,
but it's had a much warmer reception. It got, it got a five-star review in popular science magazine.
You know, it's been in big newspapers in many different countries got positive reviews. And I,
I don't, I think this is a sign of how there is a much greater openness to these ideas 10 or so years
later. This is cultural change in progress. Okay. So the, the third option I consider, and this connects,
I guess with my panpsychism is that maybe the universe itself is conscious and has some kind of
goal, goal directed behavior, a very different kind of consciousness to our own evolved consciousness,
but it non is nonetheless has some kind of mental life of its own. And I try to say that's not as
wacky of you or not as extravagant as viewers, as at first you might find.
So in the why book, I suppose I'm just trying to get this discussion going, trying to get this
conversation going more recently since publishing the book through many different conversations and
wide reading, I've decided there's a certain slightly heretical form of Christianity that, that actually
fits quite well with a lot of this stuff fits well, for example, with this God of limited powers
hypothesis, a form of Christianity closer to how the Eastern Orthodox church thinks about things,
where there's less of an emphasis on sin and more of an emphasis on unity. God is, God isn't so
interested in finding someone to punish for our sins, but is rather focused on bringing God and the
universe into a state of deep organic unity, deep harmony. And, and so, well, I kind of went public
that I've sort of embraced this slightly heretical form of so I'm not, I'm not a member of the Eastern
Orthodox church, I'm a little bit too heretical for that. But the the Anglican churches is pretty
flexible with these kinds of things. So, so I've actually embraced a form of Christianity that
involves a God of limited powers. But let me just say very finally, at that point, I always like to
emphasize, I'm very uncertain, whether it's true, right? Yeah, I think for me, faith is not about
certainty. Faith is about fundamentally for me is about trust. It's about trusting a certain view of
the meaning of existence, trusting it to guide how you interpret your deepest experiences, shape your
fundamental life goals. Now, certainty would be nice. But I think these matters are inherently very
uncertain. And yet there is a real human need, as you well know, John, to have a view on the meaning of
existence and to live that out. So either we give up on that human need, or we can choose to trust
something that has a reasonable chance of being true. So I suppose I've come to think that this form
of Christianity, because it fits well with this God of limited powers that I think is a well evidenced
hypothesis, I've come to think it's plausible enough to be worth putting my trust in. And it's brought me
community, happiness, a greater sense of meaning and purpose. And that's what I've been thinking and
writing about most recently. That's excellent. And I want to do, I want to come back to
the, you know, that your last sentence, right, about those kinds of things that really bring people,
you know, the satisfaction of the spiritual quest that can't be achieved just by getting a theoretical
conclusion in mind. I do want to come back to that. I think that's important. And I think you're
evidencing that. So, Phil gave me permission to ask him some more challenging questions. And
while we play in the ontology park. So Eastern Orthodoxy is, you know, tremendously influenced by
Neoplatonism. And Neoplatonism has this particular conception of an ultimate reality, the one that
which makes, and it's very much, Spinoza is profoundly influenced by this Neoplatonism. And
it's the idea of like, it's not just that there's a set of laws, that those laws also have a unity,
there's an ultimate unifying principle. And that unifying principle isn't, you know, just a simple,
a simplification principle. It's, it's, it's a unity across increasing diversity. And you have
the whole emanation and return that all of that. And it's very much like the way cognition is bottom
up and top down at the same time. And I've been making that argument, I'm finding that a very
plausible ontology. And there's more and more people making connections between this Neoplatonic
ontology and science, Paas's book, The One, or Paas, it's P-A-S with an umlaut over it,
so I'm not quite sure. The One, that's the title of a book by a physicist. And so I'm doing all that
to try and tell you where my questions coming from, because, well, I could hear some of my
Eastern Orthodox friends or some of my Neoplatonic friends saying,
um, you gotta, you gotta be clearer to me what you mean by this limited, uh, because, um, see,
one of the problems people have with John Stuart Mills is that, that being isn't ultimate reality.
That being and, right, the system of things it's interacting with is beholding to some principles,
uh, that are ultimate reality. Uh, and that, um, if part of what people are longing for is that which
fulfills, here's Tilla, you know, satisfies their ultimate concern, and his argument is only that
which is ultimately real will do that for you. Um, um, tell me how this God is limited
and, or maybe doesn't, and why that doesn't matter to you, but I'll phrase it as this. How is this,
this God a limited entity, I'll try to use, but yet could plausibly satisfy, uh, you know,
the longing for ultimate reality? Does, is that, does that make sense as a question?
It's an excellent question and a good challenge.
So firstly, I'm not thinking of there being anything outside of God that limits God that,
as you say, would, would not make God foundational. Um, I suppose, as Wittgenstein said,
explanations have to end somewhere. There has to be some foundational facts. So I suppose I'm thinking
this is just part of the fundamental story of God, that God is able to do some things and not able to
do others in terms. So what are those limitations? That's an important question. Um, in terms of
explaining fine tuning, which is, I think the really strong evidence here that we need to account for,
I would argue you make this, you might disagree that, that it's actually not too, not too hard to
specify the relevant limitations. What the hypothesis would be that there's a sort of structure you can
get. If you take physics or, I mean, ultimately it will be final physics. So we don't know what final
physics is yet, but just, you take physics, you take that mathematical structure in fundamental
physics, you take all the numbers out, the particular values of the constants, because physics
has these sort of fixed numbers in, um, that don't seem to have any deeper explanation, at least at
present. So you take physics, you take all the numbers out and you say, God is limited in, in,
is limited to creating a universe with that kind of structure.
That, and I think that's, and maybe just creating a universe from a singularity. So maybe God can't
create complexity. God can only create from simplicity and can only create physics with a
certain structure. So I think that would be fairly simple to state because it's simpler than physics.
Physics is pretty simple and it's simpler than that because you're sort of taking out all the numbers.
Um, so that would be, um, but that just gets you a sort of deistic God. Uh, we, we also want to say
in any spirituality, I suppose that we can experience God. Yeah. Um, but I would say, and, and I'm also
influenced by coming back to John Schellenberg, his famous argument against the traditional God is the
argument from hiddenness. Why doesn't God make God's existence more plain? Why are there so many
atheists? If God exists, why doesn't God make it obvious that God is real? Um, at the same time,
as you've already said, John, it's pretty universal that people do have a sense of a greater reality at
the core of things. So suppose I would say that God has the power to make God's existence
known, but can only do so in a, in a way that is available to people whose minds are in the right
state of mind. Maybe after long meditation, after deep experiences, after taking psychedelics,
God can't kind of cut through the hustle and bustle of ordinary life. Right. Um, and also God can't
reveal finer details. God's only able to convey a sense of, a sense of God's existence in a very
general sense of this greater reality at the core of things. Okay. So, so that's, that gives us something.
It gets trickier when we're trying to make sense of Christianity. Um, even in my toned down heretical
form, the core of it is that God and the universe are coming into a deeper state of unity, getting more
intimately connected with each other over time. And that this involves in the person of Jesus, that
God and the universe came together in some unique and unparalleled way. So how is God able to do that?
But, um, but, um, but can't, um, you know, can't cure cancer. So I've actually got a big academic paper
under, under review at the moment, trying to lay this out, how we can make sense of God being able
to become more unified with creation when it's evolved enough, when it's in a high enough form. Um, but that,
that still doesn't allow God to overcome the terrible suffering we find in the universe.
But I mean, it's tricky and this is part of the reason why I'm very uncertain Christianity is true.
Right. But I think we can tell a reasonably simple unified story, just about simple and unified enough
to me to still think there's a, there's a reasonable chance of this being true. And, and so it's something
it's, it's, it's not irrational to engage with in your spiritual life.
Okay. There's a lot there. And that was very rich. And I, I, I want to acknowledge
and appreciate your ongoing humility. Uh, Phil is demonstrating, I think totally, uh,
sincerely something that I'm constantly advocating for, uh, and something you look for as a marker
of somebody who's actually committed to rationality rather than claiming to, uh, be a representative
of rationality. He's open to correction. He's epistemically humble. So first of all,
I just want to mark that as something we should, uh, we should take note of and we should emulate.
So thank you for that. Phil. Oh, thank you, John. I don't think I'd make a very good cult leader
because I like people disagreeing with me too much. So there's a couple of things here. Um, I mean,
the, the views you said, um, you know, uh, sound very much, very similar to Spinoza or, or even, uh,
a more recent version of Spinoza, Whitehead, uh, where, you know, you have, uh, you have these sort
of two poles, the God-ish pole, and then you have the, the, the world pole, but they're actually part
of this overall arching thing called creativity, um, which is the fundamental sort of final fact,
or if you want to put it that way. And it, so it sounds very similar, uh, to that in a lot of ways.
Um, and then that brings me, but by bringing Whitehead in, I mean, one of Whitehead's points
is we have to change what we mean by being the creator. And this goes back to Spinoza. Um,
one model we have, I'm getting to a question, um, but I want to, it's a two-part question.
Uh, so one model we have is the artifact, somebody who's creating an artifact,
somebody standing outside, like making a table. Um, and, uh, and the argument from Spinoza onward
is that doesn't make sense because then you get this problem of God and reality being fundamentally
separate, uh, from each other in a way that you have, by the way, uh, consistently rejected
in our conversation. I, God's not outside and, and instead you've got, um, so the way, uh, I think,
who is it, is it, um, oh, I can't remember his name. Um, uh, wait a second. I know it right here. Uh,
that, uh, Faber, uh, the mind of Whitehead and other stuff. He says, it's more like, uh, you know,
when you're a poet and the poem, you don't write a poem. You, you know, the poem writes itself
through you. And he says, God's more like a poet than an artifact. There's somebody making an
artifact. Um, it's, and, and then he says, and this is why this God is inherently limited because,
and this goes back to Neoplatonism. God is bound by sort of the fundamental principle of realness,
which is, um, deep intelligibility. So God is bound, uh, to do things in a way that are deeply,
uh, deeply supportive of profound intelligibility, something like that. Um, and, and I think your
limited God lines up with that in a lot of ways. There's sort of a fundamental grammar, uh, of reality
that's needed there. So you get this different notion of creativity. You get this notion of sort of
flowing with the poem, uh, if I can put it that way. Um, and that's very prevalent in Faber and
his take on Whitehead. It goes back to Spinoza because that's a different notion of creativity.
And then the notion of communication gets changed. You change from the model. And this is a way of
responding to the hiddenness argument of one person speaking to another and something that is emphasized,
um, in the Neoplatonic traditions or the notion of participation, that what, what we're doing is
participating more and more in this. And therefore that requires a transformation on our part into,
you know, like the way you want to participate, the way you know, someone you love, right? Um,
they're hidden to you, uh, unless you're willing to undergo profound transformations and whereby you,
that you, you, you want to participate in their identity. It's not a matter of, um, standard models of
communication. And the reason why this works is because that is what the non-theistic sacred
traditions talk about. You become one with the Tao, you become one with Brahmin, right? And this is a
different model. So it's a different model of creativity, right? It's not the artificer and it's
a different model of communication. It's not the speaker, but it's participation. Uh, like that deep,
that deep kind of, it's when communication is more properly called communing rather than communication
that's being emphasized. What do you think about that? Does that land for you? Uh, I'm obviously
presenting my take on things and what you think about it. Absolutely. There's a lot, a lot there I'd
like to dwell on. Um, I, I, I'm a huge fan of whitehead. I mean, I, I guess I see a kindred spirit.
People ask me why I don't talk more about whitehead a lot of the time actually. Yeah. Um,
I, I see a kindred spirit with what he was trying to do and the process theologians that followed him,
most of whom were Christians, actually. I think whitehead himself was not a Christian, but, um,
and there's, he also believed in a, in a God of limited power. Uh, and so there's the, the real
connection there. I guess I don't always see the justification for kind of all of the intricacies
of the whitehead picture, which is why I don't talk about it more, but there's definitely a lot,
a lot that's really important and, and, and valuable there. And I, and I, I, I like this
attempt to move away from anthropomorphic ideas of God. I think this is, this is so important to think
people do have an idea that, you know, or the old man in the sky and it's all very, just some big
mind behind all things. And, and I think in a way, you know, that doesn't necessarily explain things,
doesn't it? It's just this other big mind. So why does that mind exist? I guess I've always been drawn
more to alternative conceptions of God in two ways. Firstly, with the, um, what's known as the
apophatic tradition in, in all of the Abrahamic faiths, Christianity, Judaism, Islam, it's, there's always
been a trend, a tradition, uh, which says that God is beyond our understanding that you can't know
anything positive about God. A book called the cloud of unknowing by an anonymous author from the 14th
century was incredibly popular in guiding medieval Christians away from the idea, the language we talk
about God in church services to a deeper understanding of God that is beyond category. Um,
earlier books talking about how denying, there was a spiritual practice of denying
all the things we could say about God and denying their negation, you know, taking us,
chanting, taking us to get to some higher conception here. Um, and, you know, I think,
well, a paper I've just, another paper I've just finished that I need to put on my website actually.
Um, if God's going to explain why, this is one of the things you want to go to, why there's anything at
all? What, what, why, why is this something rather than nothing? Then it seems God must be totally beyond
our understanding because everything we can conceive of, it might not have existed, right? Some, I could
conceive of a big, all powerful mind and say, you know, that couldn't, might not have existed.
If God is going to be something that kind of explains its own existence so that if you really
understood God's nature, you'd say, Oh my God, it has to exist. And then it explains existence of
everything else that it must be totally beyond our understanding. So that's one, one way in which I'd go
with, with God. I, I think God, what, what is God? God grounds the goal directedness, I believe
is evidenced by things like fine tuning, but that's a kind of indirect claim about God. God in God's
ultimate nature, I would say is just totally, can be experienced in some sense, but it's totally beyond
human conceptual understanding. But also I'm attracted to panentheistic views where,
were God in the universe are not binary distinct things, but in some sense, the universes within
God is made out of the very being of God. Maybe that's part of why God's has some limitations because
God creates out of God's own being in the certain maybe fixed facts about the eternal necessary being
of God. And so this does lead to a deeper understanding of a God that pervades reality,
is not out there, outside of the universe. Something we find in many of the great romantic poets, this,
and in mystical experiences, this sense of a living presence that pervades all things, that's, that's
very important to me at a, at a spiritual level. And I suppose this conception of Christianity is,
focuses on, for example, Christ's metaphor of the vine and the branches. You know, think about the
relationship between the vine and its branches, there's a deep, organic unity. So the idea is that
the ultimate goal of existence is for the universe and God to exist in that, as you say, commune, the word
you use there to exist in this state of deep, intimate, organic unity. Um, and it's an ongoing process,
I suppose, of God's really different to us, but God becoming more like us, taking on our form of
existence so that we can become more like God. The Eastern Orthodox Church talks about theosis,
us becoming more like God, sharing in God's form of existence. Uh, it's cause sometimes
shocks people. Is this, is this blasphemous? So, you know, it doesn't mean we're becoming
God, but we are becoming more like God, sharing in God's form of existence. So there's a really
positive conception of the purpose of existence and hope of a better form of existence we can aspire to.
I don't like all the sin stuff, you know, just trying to, oh, we've been naughty boys. We need to
go to hell. Uh, I like this idea of a more positive story that really spiritually resonates at a deep
level. Sorry. That was a bit long winded. No, no, no. That was good. Phil. I, I, I, I, I, I think there's
a lot of convergence between your position and sort of, um, the Neoplatonism I find inherent in Eastern
Orthodox Christianity and your idea that God creates out of himself. That's, that's, you know, that's
Eregena or Eregena. I keep hearing different pronunciations depending on the age of the person
you're talking to. Um, and, uh, and later, uh, Christian Neoplatonism is talking in a way that's
extremely similar to my ear. Um, you know, and I'm a, I'm a student of this. Um, uh, I, I consider
myself, you know, a devoted student of the Neoplatonic tradition. I consider myself a Zen
Neoplatonist in fact. Um, and, uh, and if I were to return to Christianity and I may be on some dark
journey back to it, I don't know. I'm very open to things right now. Um, uh, the, the place where I
believe I would find a home would be in some form of Eastern Orthodox Christianity, but one that was
a little bit more, uh, open to, uh, current for ECOG PSI and the kind of stuff I do, which now brings
me to the other half I want to talk about. I think we've played very well in the ontology half. I want
to turn to the existential half, and this is another area of my work. I do a lot of work on meaning in
life. Um, and I talk about a meeting crisis, which is often misunderstood. I'm not saying that
everybody is out there going through existential angst in some profound way. What I mean by meaning
crisis is that these questions are there and they event people often will eventually bump into them
at extreme moments. Like the existential philosophers talked about limit situations and our culture is
very poorly set up to help that. I'll give one example. Um, it looks like it's reasonable to
conclude about 40% of the population have spontaneous mean meaning it is not dependent. It's not contingent
on a religious upbringing. They have spontaneous anomalous experiences that can be described as sort
of this family of, you know, visionary experiences, mystical experiences, psychedelic experiences, sensed
presence experiences. And for many of them, um, these are distressing experiences because they don't
have a framework, meaning not just a conceptual, but also a series of practices. Remember you're going to
church, right? That help them properly integrate that in like in a growth way. Uh, so for in particular,
there's some research showing that when atheists have these spontaneous experience and they do have
them by the way, um, some of them come out of it better. They, they often have to transform themselves
in the worldview, but many of them really suffer, uh, because these experiences make it like the sense
of being called as the agent said, they put a terrific call on you and yet their, their framework,
um, is not, uh, does, can't properly accommodate these experiences in a psychologically healthy manner.
That is only one example. I'm, I'm, I don't want to pin everything on that one thing. I'm just
using that as an example of what I'm talking about. So this idea that there's a meeting crisis
is not the idea that everybody's out there suffering, although I think there is more suffering.
It's the idea that there's less, less, what I call existential resilience. Our culture gives us less,
less existential resilience for dealing with these limits, situations, dealing with these kinds of
anomalous, um, occurrences that may happen to us. So I've been like many other people, this is a hot
topic, which I think is a symptom of the meaning crisis now in, in academia, which is what did we
be talking about? We're talking about meaning in life. And so I do a lot of, you know, reflection on
and contribute contributions to the empirical work around this question. This is an empirical question.
Like what is it that people are talking about when they're talking about their lives being meaningful or
meaning less? Um, and what are its cognitive dimensions? Now, the research seems to be,
and I'm almost to my question, Phil, the research seems to be converging on four things. Uh, although
two of the four are, uh, probably different aspects of the same deeper underlying things. So it's four,
but really maybe three, uh, something like that. Um, so the first one is when you've, uh, you've
foregrounded in your book, which is purpose. So people need a sense of purpose. Um, I want to come
back to that. Um, the next one is people need coherence. They need, so absurdity, as Thomas Nagel
argued very brilliantly, isn't a matter of a propositional conclusion. It comes from a perspectival
clash, uh, where for example, uh, cosmic absurdity is you're living within this perspective and everything
seems meaningful. You zoom out to the cosmic perspective and what you're doing seems
insignificant. And that's the sense of absurdity. So you need coherence. Um, you need, you need,
or to put it the other way around, you need the universe to not, you need reality to not be absurd
to you. Right. And this is, I want to really stress, this is at the perspectival level. This isn't at,
you know, just a set of well-kept logically coherent beliefs or propositions. And of course,
human beings, we, it's developmental to us that we play with perspectival clash. That's what humor is.
That's what insight problem solving is. So you can see how this is, it's tapping into fundamental
features of cognition. This, this need to get perspectival coherence as something not reducible
to propositional coherence. Okay. That's coherence. The next is significance. You need things in your
life that aren't ephemeral, that aren't transient, that aren't superficial. They have to have some
depth, uh, to it. And then the fourth is mattering, but significance and mattering seem to be two sides
of the same coin. So mattering, and this is a both in a psychology and an excellent book by philosopher
Susan Wolf, meaning in life and why it matters. Right. Uh, it's the sense of being connected to
something larger than oneself, which is a metaphor. Uh, people don't lead means spatial temporarily
larger because of you or to sort of, you know, make them live in an ocean liner or chain them to a
mountain. They don't feel any kind of fulfillment. They, so one way, and this is the way I've been arguing,
what they're articulating is when you're in a dream, you're in this small world and it seems real in that world.
And when you wake up, hence all the awakening and enlightenment metaphors, you're at a bigger world
that shows how the, and from that larger perspective, you can see what was unreal about the, right,
the smaller perspective and see, it's kind of the reverse side also of the absurdity thing. And so
what, and what that research shows is that mattering, um, and probably significance
are more important than purpose for meaning in life that, right, reliably, um, now it could be
that we're also dealing with what do we mean by purpose. And I'm willing to talk to you about that
because I, I'm open about this. Um, so the researchers typically presented the way you do,
um, in our discussion so far, you know, this overarching goal, um, sort of the, the medical that
organizes all the other goals. Um, and it might be that it's not, it's not that way. Um, it's not
about something, it's not about a state that you're working towards. Um, it might be what we talked
about earlier with the sacred. It might be a sense of having a north star, having an ori, uh, that which
orients you, uh, helps direct you. Um, and I'm, I'm trying to argue that we might want to replace
purpose with orientation, but when I do that, I mean, and now I'm talking to exactly the right person,
I bump up against, you know, the kind of arguments that you very, very powerfully are representing,
and you're not the only one doing it, that there might be something like purpose to the universe.
And so there, there's potential connection here between the existential side, but there's also
disconnection. And I, I'm not really framing this as a question. I'm sort of landing that in your lap,
right? There's, there's, and so I have tended to back away from, uh, you know, I think,
I think it's fair to say this American Anglo-American culture's emphasis on reducing
meaning to purpose, I think is fundamentally flawed, um, uh, for all the reasons I just laid out.
And then, but I, I, I want to, I, I don't, I'm not dismissive. I want to take into account what
you're arguing. So that's the problem I'm sort of presenting to you. I'm presenting you with a
problem. It's not so much a question, but, um, I, I, I, I, if you need to ask me more about clarifying
the problem, I'm happy, but that's sort of the, the way the challenge is occurring to me. It's
like, I don't have like a gotcha question. It's more like, how does this go together? How does this
work? That's very, very, very interesting. And, um, again, there's lots more I, I need to go away
and think about. I mean, firstly, let me say, I don't have very strong opinions in this area. And part
of why I want to talk to each other is to learn more myself. I mean, I do have, people are going to
think I don't, I don't believe anything. I do have strong views in certain areas about the fine
tuning. I really do think that is evidence for goal directedness on consciousness.
The problems of physicalism, I've got strong opinions, but on these more existential questions,
I suppose, as you say, it's partly empirical, it's partly, um, philosophical, and I'm really just
wanting to open the conversation and learn something. I suppose what I try to, a couple of things,
what I try to suggest in the book, the purpose in the universe can give. So it's a question, you know,
what, what difference does the being of purpose to the universe make? You could have someone who,
my colleague, David Farachi, uh, when I was talking about this fine tuning stuff, and he's like,
yeah, I see the arguments, his purpose. I don't care though. It doesn't affect my life. I make my own
meaning. Um, so that's, you know, that's, that is one, one position. So, so that's kind of maybe one
sort of, in some sense, extreme position that, you know, probably isn't purpose to the universe,
but even if there is, it's irrelevant. We make our own meaning. The other extreme to that is,
for example, the Christian philosopher, William Lane Craig, who we earlier mentioned, who, who basically
says, if there's no purpose to the universe, it's all pointless. We might, we might as well just kill
each other if we want to. He actually says, you know, there's no right, just all the wasted. And
not only religious thinkers, uh, the antinatalist philosopher, David Benatar, who, um, what's his
book now on the purpose of existence. It's not his most famous book. Um, the cosmic dilemma or something.
I cut my blanket on the name, but he argues that life is not entirely meaningless, but because there's
no cosmic purpose, it's almost meaningless. It's not worth it. And so he thinks it's, it's immoral
to have children. We shouldn't kill ourselves now we're here, but we should let the human race
peacefully pass out of existence. Um, so those two extremes, I suppose what I tried to say in the book
is that a middle way position, I'm always the middle way guy, a middle way position that even
if there's no cosmic purpose, you can have a meaningful life. You can have a meaningful life
by pursuing things that are worth doing, kindness, creativity, the pursuit of knowledge.
But maybe if you're living in hope of a greater purpose, maybe there's the potential for a more
meaningful existence. Um, you know, we want our lives to make a difference. If we can contribute in
some small way to the purposes of the whole of reality, that's kind of huge. So maybe we can get
a deeper sense of meaning and purpose from that. On the other hand, maybe it comes with risks. It might
not be true. You might be living, this is all very uncertain. You might be orientating your life to
something that turns out not to be true. And you know, I mean, one part of this is I would just like
to encourage various experiments in living. You know, I don't want to tell people not to be a secular
atheist. I don't want to tell people not to be anything. Um, but trying out, not being ideological,
not being dogmatic, trying out these different ways of finding meaning and purpose. And I certainly,
yeah, you make a good point is, is, is, is, is, is purpose the only thing to a meaningful life?
Is it even the most important thing? I don't, I definitely, I haven't actually framed that in my,
in my mind. So I'm grateful for you for raising that. And it's something I'll go on to think about.
I definitely don't want to say yes to that, but yes, it's the only important thing. Um, finally, though,
I mean, just coming back to religion, connecting to what you started off with,
I suppose I am inclined, and this is regardless of the truth or falsity. Now I am inclined to think
there's a very important social role religion has played historically in bringing the community
together, marking the seasons and the big moments of life, birth, coming of age, marriage, death,
um, giving people a framework and a focus for spiritual practice, a way of interpreting
and responding to their deepest experiences. And the secular world, for what it's worth,
has found it very difficult to replicate that. Maybe, I'm not saying it, it never could. There's
a very interesting book by the philosopher Philip Kitcher, Life After Faith, I think it's called,
where he argues that humanists need to develop these similar institutions that to play this role.
And again, let's have these experiments in living. Let's see if that can be done. But thus far, at least,
it doesn't seem to have worked out very well. Um, so yeah, I'm, I'm, well, I've got a, another big
grant project after this one. Um, I'm part of several universities on thinking about the nature of faith.
That's going to be, uh, my grant project for next academic year. And I suppose I'm, I'm working very
tentatively at the moment on a, a conception of faith as trust, not belief, not belief even, right?
As I'm not confident enough, it's true to say, I believe it. I wouldn't say I believe Christianity,
but thinking of it more as two forms of trust, right? So coming back to these anomalous experiences,
all these, instead of saying, you know, they're definitely true, these experiences,
they're definitely revealing to me something about reality or the definitely nonsense,
they're definitely just funny things in my brain. You can say, I don't know, but I'm going to make
a decision to trust, trust these experiences, trust what they seem to be telling me and working with
that. So that will be the first step of faith that makes you kind of spiritual, but not religious,
trusting these spiritual experiences. And then the second step, if you want to take it is
trusting a particular spiritual or religious framework for interpreting and acting on those
experiences. So again, you know, I think when, if you, if you think of whether to join a, whether
to join a religion or, or, or a spiritual practice, you shouldn't be thinking, is it definitely true?
I think a lot of people think that, is it definitely true? And then there's no overwhelming case.
I think you should be thinking, is there some chance it's true? And is it going to bring me
happiness? Is it going to bring me community? Is it going to bring me a deeper sense of meaning
and purpose and a way of structuring my spiritual life? Thinking of those two things in tandem.
Um, and I think thinking of faith as trust is, is, is a, is a healthier way of thinking about that.
You know, I think people are rightly suspicious of certainty.
I agree with that. I've been doing a long, I mean, all the way through awakening from
the meeting crisis, I've been arguing for an alternative conception of faith as faithfulness,
as opposed to some kind of epistemic grasp. Um, and I've been arguing that that faithfulness,
that trust is born out of a communing of our participatory identification. Uh, I, I trust my
partner. It's not certainty, but I trust her because I commune with her. Uh, she and I are bound
together. We participate in each other's identities. That doesn't mean, in fact, it doesn't mean I have
certainty about her or any kind of complete grasp on who and what she are. In fact, my trust, uh,
discloses to me exactly the opposite. There's something profoundly mysterious about Sara that
points to her realness in a way that will always exceed my grasp. And I know I could talk about Sara
because you've met Sara. Um, so, uh, and you know, the word trust and truth have a common etiological
origin and troth, right? Like in betrothal with troth, we have that connectedness, that community,
that participatory knowing. So I talk about participatory knowing and also this perspectival
knowing we were talking about with absurdity and things like that. And what's interesting about that
is what predicts whether or not people are religious or not. And I'll just use the categories within
Western Abrahamic culture, because that's the categories under which the research is done,
has to do with what is called CRED, C-R-E-D, which means credibility enhancing displays.
Um, I can predict whether or not you're religious by the number of people you trusted as a childhood
who are religious or who are not religious. So it's not, this is what not, these things do not
predict the way people think they do, the way the enlightenment said that they did.
So intuitive associational thinking, that's why you're religious. Nope.
Analytic thinking is why you're an atheist. No, actually there's some country that doesn't hold
worldwide. And one country you'll be pleased to know, or maybe just pleased to know,
in which that's exactly the opposite is the UK. Analytic thinking is predictive of religiosity
in the UK. Not, yes. Uh, and this is research done by Gervais and others who are atheists by the
explicit, uh, pronouncement. What, and what their research shows is the number of people that do
these otherwise mysterious things to you, like when you're like, they're doing stuff and it doesn't make
any sense to you, but you trust them. And so you are willing to undertake, uh, to enter into a
participatory knowing and an imitation of the perspective they take. And that tends to, uh,
predict if you're going to be religious or not. Now, this cred thing or the people being credible
in that sense, right? Makes a lot of sense because of the way cognitive development works.
So you're a child, right? And there's a strategy. Maybe it's a mnemonic strategy. Maybe it's a
strategy for how to improve remembering, right? If you, uh, when you take up that strategy,
there is a reliable phenomenon called utilization deficiency. The strategy actually degrades your
performance because you have to devote a lot of working memory to holding the strategy and it just
degrades your performance. So if you were just sticking from an egocentric perspective,
you wouldn't actually ever undertake these strategies that initially reduce your performance,
but actually predict long term improvement. Well, why do people do this? They do this because they
trust their parents. They trust their teacher. These people are incredible. We need to internalize
credible people or we can't properly cognitively develop. Related research. So this is done by somebody
who was a student of mine and then my TA and then a collaborator and he's doing a postdoc now.
People are undertaking aspirational projects in the sense that Agnes Keller talks about there.
They want to be better. They want to be somebody other than who they are, right? They want to be
maybe wiser. I'm such a fool. I want to be a wiser person. They go through and what you can do is you
can take, this is an empirical question. What things do people do that help them do that aspiration
and what things don't? Well, a lot of the things we think we do like planning and calculating,
that's not really predictive. And this also lines up with independent work from
Hirschfeld and others. Internalizing a role model, that's what's predictive. It's this credible
machinery again. So if you internalize a role model, if you internalize a sage,
that is predictive of you actually successfully going through aspiration. And what this means is,
this is why I have a bit of issue around the spiritual but not religious. I'm not hostile to
them by any means. But the idea that we need community, we need perspectives other than our
own. We need credible people that have properly, and don't forget the adverb, properly earned our trust.
And this is what religions traditionally did. They gave people communities bound to traditions
that had precedent setting and things like this, that managed and monitored this
this irremovable machinery of development and aspiration. And so I think this is one of my
concerns. I, like you, think we should be doing many models of experiments of ways of good living.
But there is increasing criticism, philosophical and psychological, of that fact that we've gone
into, we've been through a long period of hyper individualism. There was a lot of gains from that.
But this hyper individualism tends to put people into a kind of autodidactic attempt to solve these
problems. And it looks like they properly are best solved, not autodidactically, but dialogically in
community with other people. And so what do you think of that argument?
I think there's a lot, there's a lot there I would agree with. I think there's this very crude idea
is that we're all individual rational truth seekers and we'll work it all out for ourselves. You know,
this is maybe the idea people associate with new atheism or sort of, but I mean, that is
absolutely impossible, isn't it? That knowledge is so specialized for one thing. And you know,
you can't, I believe the universe is 13 billion years old, 13, 14, somewhere between. I don't know
the scientific evidence, right? I'm not going to sit down and work it all out. I, you know,
it would take me 10 years. So there does have to be a form of trust that comes with risk. Again,
James, William James is so good in his, his wonderful paper, the will to believe,
which he later thought should be called the right to believe. I think that's right. That,
you know, he's talking, he engages with Clifford who thought, you know, it is immoral to believe
without evidence is always and everywhere. And James with his wonderful nuance, he always has says,
well, Clifford's focusing wholly on avoiding false beliefs. Very important. But there's also a danger
of accidentally avoiding true beliefs, right? So if someone, if there's some, maybe there's some
religion or maybe belief in God is, is uncertain, maybe you could have two atheists who both think
it's 50, sorry, an atheist that, let me start that again. Maybe you've got two individuals who think
the existence of God is 50, 50, the atheist could, someone could say, well, I'm going to be an atheist
because I don't want to risk being wrong. But someone else could say, well, I'm going to believe in God
because I, I don't want to risk missing out on something true. And which one of those is correct?
And it's, there's a, there's a, there's a, a deep kind of uncertainty here. Um, but yeah, I, I think
there's absolutely fascinating work by, uh, another interesting figure here is, um, the liberal historian
of religion, Karen Armstrong, who talked in her fascinating book, The Case for God, which I also think
is, is, is, is a bad title because you think it's just going to be some dogmatic case, but God definitely
exists, which is not at all like that. It's very much a different way of thinking about religion
and arguing that sort of like, there's been a modern corruption. The way we think about religion in the
past few hundred years is very different to how we've thought about it going back 50,000 years.
And part of that is the focus on belief. And she, she makes a really interesting case that it's sort of
a translation error. Uh, when the word from the new Testament, the Greek word pistis actually has
more connotations of engagement, loyalty, commitment, having your heart in something. And actually when
we first translated the Bible, she says this, this was a good translation because the word believe
Belieben was, was closer to, yeah, exactly. The German word Belieben. She quotes Shakespeare,
a line from Shakespeare, um, where the character is being very snobbish to someone who's lowborn
and they are told, believe not thy disdain, right? Believe not thy disdain. Don't have your heart
in your snobbish feelings. Whereas over time, the word believe has changed and now it's closer to
with the Protestant reformation with the scientific revolution, it's closer to some intellectual
commitment to a theory of reality. So now you read the gospels and you think, oh, Jesus really
cared what your theory of reality was, you know, salvation depends on it. Whereas if you actually
look at the cases, uh, where Jesus talks about faith, it is, it's always someone who's shown commitment,
who's gone the extra mile, there's the crippled person who's can't get near Jesus. So his, his
friends lower him in the roof, which is like, oh my God, what incredible faith. You know, it's like,
it's not like, what are you, what are the propositions you believe? So, so I do think we need to,
and, and, you know, she thinks that we should think of the, when you say the creed, you should think of it
more. I commit, not I believe, but I commit to this. I'm committing to this as part of the story
through which I'm understanding my form of existence. So I do think we need to move to,
to this way of engaging, not just with religion, but with spirituality and even,
even the pursuit of knowledge, which is much more, less individualistic, more embedded in the society,
less reductionistic, more of a holistic conceptual things. Well, actually I'm about to start a book
actually after Christmas on, on re-imagining religion. I don't think I've mentioned that to
you, John, and I do want to connect to an idea that's quite common that it, that we should be
having a more holistic sense of health and wellbeing. And my wife's a medical, who you, who you've met,
Emma, my wife, is a medical ethicist. And there is a, a, a strong line in, in contemporary philosophy of
health, which draws on the work of Aristotle in Aristotle's more holistic idea of the organism,
which is not a reductionist idea. It's just a bunch of cells and, you know, holistic ideas are sort of a
useful fiction. No, it's an idea that we start with the proper functioning of the organism and we
under it's so it's kind of top down, we understand the parts of the organism or the health of the
organism in terms of the overall proper functioning of the organism. And we understand health as a matter
of flourishing, functioning well. So we don't just have this subjective idea of happiness,
happiness, as you know, feeling good, kind of a sugar high, you know, it's, we go for flourishing.
And happiness is a, true happiness is a sort of by-product of that. So I would like to, you know,
connect much, much more to this tradition from Aristotle, which contrasts in contemporary philosophy
of health to, I guess you've got more reductionist views of health and also more social constructivist
views, which perhaps arguably worryingly lead us into relativism or something. But I think there's
a really nice tradition here, which has been somewhat neglected, which it would be, it would
be useful to draw some inspiration from, I think. Well, that was wonderful, Phil. I'm also on my
sabbatical writing a book on re-imagining religion. So we're going to be writing books that are going to
be deeply convergent. I just finished teaching, just finishing up teaching a course, well, two courses,
one at the University of Toronto on the cognitive science of religion, where I basically do a long
term Wittgensteinian argument about taking apart all of the enlightenment picture that has us in
our script, this propositional tyranny that you were speaking to, that I talk about that and how
that's a driver of the meaning crisis, this reductionism that's very problematic. A lot of the
dichotomies, and we can't quite get into them all, you touch on them in your book, like the is-ought,
the fact value, and how these, you know, Catherine Pickstock in her book, Aspects of Truth, all of
these have, you know, are falling, have fallen apart within, you know, rigorous academic analytic
philosophy, and yet it hasn't percolated back to challenge the enlightenment framework, right? And
what happens if you unwrap that and get people again, like to reorient to issues about meaning and
depth of realness? And this is what I'm doing with the class. And then what comes up for you more
spontaneously that we could perhaps reconsider or reconceive of as religion? That's exactly the
project, the argument I'm making. Oh, we need to swap notes.
Yeah, yeah, we need to swap notes. Yeah, I mean, let's talk about this at some point because I've
got the argument and then I've got a more specific part of that argument from an online course I'm
doing for Jonathan Pajot's symbolic world called The Cognitive Science of Ritual. Why
ritual is non-reducible to propositions, even myths and stories that ritual and a lot of the
anthropology of ritual has been arguing this now quite consistently. It's sui generis, you can't
reduce because it has to do with this perspectival knowing, this participatory communing, and the
transformations and the aspirations therein. And so that's what I'm doing. And it sounds like you're
doing something that also connects with another book I'm doing. I'm writing a book with Terry Dentry
about this much more Aristotelian holistic way of approaching people dealing with chronic pain.
And what this means is don't have single practitioners dictating. You have multiple
practitioners representing multiple disciplines that come in and have to enter into deep,
you know, mutually transformative dialogue because they have complementary strengths and weaknesses
and the patient is present and the patient can participate. When you shift to that way of dealing
with pain and she's got empirical work, her PhD in a couple of papers published, that significantly
reduces chronic pain above and beyond our standard model of how we present the medications or the,
you know, going to physiotherapy as the way of dealing with pain. So yes, very convergent.
I am very interested in that project precisely because of its possibilities of reducing a significant
source of suffering. The number of people suffering from chronic pain, of course, is much larger than we
realize and it looks like it's an even a growing number. We consider that we make an argument for a
hypothesis, not a conclusion, but a hypothesis that one of the things driving the increase in chronic pain is,
again, that people seem to be struggling with issues around meaning and connectedness. We have a loneliness epidemic.
The number of close friends people have is reliably decreasing decade by decade. It's becoming very problematic in your country.
In your country, the UK is really, really wrestling with this. And we now know that loneliness is as bad to your health as,
well, we have reason to believe, evidence and argument to make us believe that loneliness is as detrimental
as smoking to your health. Really?
Rhea, and this makes sense given our evolutionary history. It just, you know, it's, oh yeah, of course, right?
That makes good sense. And so I think I'm pleased by how convergent, even to the fact that we're writing
very similar books and participating in sort of similar discussions. I'm really happy about this.
I'm glad we've got this chance.
I'm sure there'll still be stuff we can argue over.
I'm sure we are. Well, you know, to be fair to the conversation, I presented you with some significant
challenges. This wasn't, this wasn't me just patting you on the back. You've given me a lot to think
about. Which is, and that's genuine dialogos. I think that's when, when people are willing to enter
into a mutually transformative, reciprocally opening dialogue, then that is, I think we're, and the
research is also supporting this. That's where we are at our rational best. And this, of course,
goes back to the Socratic vision. I'm going to wrap it up, Phil. I think we should talk again.
I think we should definitely talk again. Well, I think we should talk off camera about our two books
and how we want, maybe relate them together or coordinate them or talk about each other's books
in our books. I'm open to all of these. So I think we should talk about that. And then I propose that
maybe I'm inviting you to come back after you've written that book, because I will have written
mine and we could read each other's book and perhaps we'll be collaborating along the way.
And we could enter into another one of these lectern discussions about re-imagining, reconceiving,
or re-trusting religion. And I invite you right now and hope you'll come back and we will do that
together. I'd love to. That sounds great. Yeah. I think, you know, there is something exciting going
on at the moment. I think people are moved on from new atheism, I think, and thinking again,
just starting to think about these things in a slightly different, less dogmatic, very uncertain,
maybe slightly heretical, healthier, I think, view of these things. And it's a conversation that's
just starting. And I think it's very exciting. And I look forward to continuing it with yourself
as well as others. It's going to be good. Excellent. So thank you, Phil. So everyone,
he's got it on his bookshelf and here it is. Strong recommendation. Yeah. Strong recommendation for this
book. Many of you who are interested in my work, I can predict, like almost a scientific prediction,
that you will find this book deeply valuable and enriching. At some point, I want to talk to Phil
about his panpsychism, because I do think it's one of the more regional forms. And I want to know
how similar it is to the pan-experientialism of Whitehead, how similar it is to the kind of stuff about,
you know, the neoplatonic emergence and emanation framework that we both were pointing to.
And so perhaps we can also get you back and we can talk about that too.
That'd be good. Yeah. Thanks for mentioning the book. It's got a nice cover, if nothing else.
And there's also an audio version I narrated myself, which removed, I noticed a lot of
embarrassing typos along the way. So I managed to remove some of them. Hopefully the next written
version will have those removed also. But yeah, it's been a lovely conversation. Thanks, John. Long
may it continue. Yes. Long may it continue. So everyone, there will of course be links in the
notes to this video. So I'm hoping that Phil will give us links to his website. We'll provide a link to
the book. I always like to argue on Twitter if anyone wants to have a row on Twitter. Always up for that.
Well, that's one of our differences. I don't like to do that. But the links will be here in the notes.
And so I won't say goodbye. I'll say till we talk again. Till we talk again. Thanks, John.
