How are you doing today, Edward?
I'm doing great, Kurt.
It's great to see you, and it's great to be back on the Theories of Everything podcast.
Yes, and to give some context for people who are wondering what is this particular episode
about, the reason we're here is that my good friend, professor of physics, Lucas Cardoso,
WhatsApp messaged me a webpage titled Proof of the Geometric Langlands Conjecture, and
then he asked me if this was legitimate.
So I then WhatsAppped my other good friend, namely you, professor of mathematics, Edward
Frankel, to find out if it was indeed, and you said yes.
And moreover, we talked about how you're like Forrest Gump, and many mathematical achievements
have you peppered in, either in the foreground or in the background.
The Forrest Gump of mathematics.
Yes, exactly.
So Love and Math covers some of that.
That's your popular book, and the link to that will be on screen and in the description.
And in that book, you provide an accessible introduction to what's one of the most abstract
of all the mathematical topics, namely the Langlands conjectures.
And since this is a recent monumental result, which is decades in the making, this channel
is one of the places where we can go into the technical details in podcast form instead
of overviews.
So you brought your trusty iPad, and you're going to walk us through what this result means,
how it was achieved, and what the future looks like.
That's right.
Yes.
So I'm happy to be back.
And I also want to say that from watching your videos of your interviews, of your conversations
on this podcast series of everything, I feel like your audience is more interested in a
more in-depth discussion of some fairly sophisticated topics in mathematics, quantum physics, and other
areas.
So that's why I was actually happy to accept your invitation to talk about the subject, which
is quite esoteric and quite sophisticated and quite technical.
Because I know that there is a sufficient, at least sufficient number of your viewers, of
your audience, who actually dig this kind of discussions, this kind of discussions, which
perhaps go more, go deeper and into more technical aspects than discussions on other podcasts.
Yes.
So I just want to say from the beginning that this is really a very important achievement
indeed.
And like you said, it caps several decades of work by a large group of mathematicians.
I have been involved in this since about 1990, so I was, you know, I was very small.
So I was, I met actually at the time, I met Vladimir Drinfeld, who was one of the pivotal
figures in the subject, a field medalist and so on, has probably got all the major awards
by now.
He's a professor at the University of Chicago.
So at that time, this is 1990, we were both at Harvard University visiting and he was actually
very interested in my work because it actually, he was anticipating starting this new kind
of a new part of the Langlands program, which became known as a geometric Langlands program.
And he thought that my results, my ideas were useful for that.
And so then we would meet every day and talk about it.
And so then I was like, curious, what is this Langlands program?
And this is 1990, so there were not, there weren't so many, it wasn't in the air, like
people weren't talking about this that much, especially it's new, but it was quite removed
from my initial area of interest, which was representations of infinite dimensional algebra.
And so I had the luck of actually having one of the main figures in the subject teach
me about this, the basics.
And so this is 34 years ago, so that's how many years I have been involved in this.
And indeed my work was important in Drinfeld's work with Bellenson, which launched this conjecture,
geometric Langlands conjecture that kind of like flowered recently in this series of works
by, I think it's nine mathematicians, but led a team of mathematicians, teamwork, it's
really like 500 pages or more.
Led by Dennis Gaizguri, who is an old friend of mine.
I've written like, I counted today, 11 papers together, eight of which are very closely
related to the subject and in fact are used in the proof.
And there are many other great, you know, young mathematicians like Sam Ruskin and Dario
Beraldo, whom I have known.
I was basically his co-advisor when he was a graduate student here at Berkeley.
So in other words, I'm kind of like well positioned to see the big picture and I'm happy to share
it with you and with your audience because the subject is quite abstract, like you said.
And so one needs some guidance to kind of penetrate through this abstraction, this, you know, kind
of maybe somewhat obscure notions and concepts, but they are important.
And I think that people don't necessarily have to understand the technical stuff precisely,
but just have an idea, have a gist of an idea of what these concepts are, how they relate to each other.
Because after all, you know, a lot of people know about quantum physics, they know about entanglement,
they know about various other kind of weird aspects of quantum mechanics or quantum field theory.
People know a little bit about string theory, for example, and so on.
Because physicists have done a great job kind of explaining these ideas in down-to-earth terms.
But mathematicians haven't.
Mathematicians haven't as much.
So my book, you mentioned my book, Love and Math, one of the motivations for writing this book was exactly
to present these ideas in accessible form for the general audience.
It was published in 2013, so about 10 years ago.
And so I've always tried to do it.
I've always tried to share these ideas with the general audience.
And I think this is a great opportunity to do this again, because we are witnessing kind of a landmark
achievement in the subject being done in this recent series of work.
So I think it's a very opportune time to revisit some of the aspects of the Langlands program,
to look at the big picture, to talk about some of the concepts and ideas that go into this proof.
Because these are concepts and ideas not only important for the Langlands program,
but they are kind of bread and butter of modern mathematics.
And so the more of us, the more people are aware of this, as these things come in the air,
in the conversation, I think we all benefit from it.
Mathematicians benefit because it helps us also to leave, you know, our little office or our little
desk, you know, and go talk to other people and kind of get, maybe it helps us to also get kind of a
bigger picture.
And, but also helps other people to understand what these guys are doing, what kind of ideas
are being played, are being played with today in modern mathematics.
Some of those people you mentioned that you collaborated with, did you ever collaborate
with Langlands himself?
Yes, I have.
Just as an aside, for people who are listening, the name Langlands has been around for so long,
decades now, the Langlands program, that it sounds, it would sound like he's no longer around because
it's such an historic name, but he's alive and well at the Institute for Advanced Study.
So I just want to show you Robert Langlands here. So here he is sitting at his office at the
Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. This picture was taken 1999. Interesting fact,
this is the office previously occupied by Albert Einstein. I'm serious, it's not a joke. That's the
office occupied by Albert Einstein. And in fact, if you compare the photographs of Langlands at this
office, and also he's given some talks, there are videos online and so on. With the picture of Einstein,
you will see it's the same office. Now, as I mentioned, I have collaborated with Langlands.
We actually wrote a paper together with a third, another mathematician, Bao Chang Gu, who is a
field medalist at the University of Chicago. That paper, I think we published in 2010 or something.
So I've known Langlands for many years and we talked a lot, but especially between 2008-2010,
we collaborated quite closely. I visited him a number of times at the Institute for Advanced Study.
I've spent a lot of time at this office, sometimes arguing with him, you know, he's a tough, he's a
tough client, you know, I have to say, he doesn't take any bullshit. So sometimes we kind of went a
little bit, you know, locked our horns. Can you give an example? Well, you know,
he would be sometimes skeptical about things. And, you know, I was kind of, I was, I guess I was young,
I was younger and I felt a little bit like I had to prove myself. So occasionally I would push back
and say, no, it is correct. You don't understand.
You ended up being correct.
Well, I would be biased, but I think.
Yes. Two sides to every story.
I think that I was, I held my own and well, we did complete the paper and I'm proud of it. It was
published, like I said, about 2010. And, and, you know, so obviously he accepted some of it, but
his comments were always on point. I have to say also all jokes aside, you know, that even though
he was already like in his seventies and so on, but he was still sharp and kind of like, you know,
quick on his toes and like, yeah, what is this about? He would pick up exactly the things where
things were not quite fitting together, for example. So anyway, that was a lot of fun. So that's,
that's who he is. So he's a mathematician, Canadian born, by the way, Canadian born from
British Columbia. And it's a beautiful story actually, because he was, you know, he lived
in a small town. His father was a carpenter. And for all he knew, he would just inherit
family business and, you know, make the window seals and stole window seals and stuff like that.
But there was a teacher, there was a mathematics teacher at his school who inspired him to go to
university. He went to UBC, University of British Columbia. He wasn't planning to.
This is after the war, you know, he was like, okay, well, this is my, this is my town. This is
what I'm, where I'm going to live here and, you know, do the stuff that my father is doing.
But his, his teacher, this is all according to like, he wrote a couple of biographical
sketches notes for when he received some major awards, you know, so I,
that's where I picked this up. He said something like his teacher shamed him in front of the
classroom full of kids, his classmates saying that you have to go to university, you know,
it would be unforgivable if you don't go to university in front of other kids. And he was
like, okay, well, if he says so, maybe I should. And so he enrolled in UBC, University of British Columbia,
and he describes how he felt early, you know, first year, second year, he felt
kind of inferior to the kids from Europe who seem to know a lot more stuff than he did. He studied,
you know, in this, in this provincial town, small town, and he felt a little bit inferior to them.
But I think it gave him a little bit of fuel, like, I'm going to show this guys. And so of course,
you know, years later, he comes up with these ideas, which became known as the Langlands program.
So how did it happen? So this was late 60s. In fact, 1967 is the year when he formulated his ideas
for the first time in writing, and it was in a letter. In those days, there was no email, obviously.
So sometimes mathematicians would write things or type things, and either send it by mail,
or if somebody was close enough, as was the case. André Weil was a great mathematician who was in
Princeton at the same time as Langlands, and Langlands gave him this bunch of notes, and they
were actually handwritten. And there's a beautiful cover page, which I'll show you later. But
André Weil could not make, you know, understand his handwriting. So actually,
he asked him to type the letters. Eventually, he typed it up, and I think it's like 20 or 30 pages,
still available, you can find it online, where he shared these ideas. It's not clear that André Weil,
who was himself a towering figure in mathematics, very important mathematician of the 20th century,
a professor at the Institute for Advanced Study. At that time, Langlands was not a professor at the
Institute for Advanced Study. He was at Princeton University, I believe. But they were in the same
town and the same place in Princeton. And I'm not sure André Weil actually understood what he wrote,
but it was a great opportunity for Langlands to kind of put these things organized on paper.
And then the whole thing just launched because this letter was shared. People made photocopies,
Xerox copies, you know. And a lot of people got interested in this stuff. And that's how Langlands
program was launched. So now, fast forward, 67. So fast forward, 2007, 40 years. I wrote this book,
before Love and Math, I wrote this book, Langlands Correspondence for Luke Groups. Correspondence
doesn't mean like sending letters to each other, even though letters are very important in this story.
Correspondence here means a kind of like one-to-one correspondence, a relation between two kinds of
objects. And we will talk about this later on. And the very first sentence in the preface to this book,
this was published by Cambridge University Press in 2007. And the very first sentence I wrote is that
the Langlands program has emerged in recent years as a blueprint for a grand unified theory of mathematics.
I just wrote it, you know. So it was a bit of a showmanship, you know, like, okay, well, that's,
you know, kind of like to present it in the most favorable light. But interestingly enough, this
expression caught on. And now I'm quoted in all kinds of places as one who said that this is a grand
unified theory of mathematics. So now this gave me an idea for the opening. So because I know that you
are interested, well, first of all, your podcast is called Theories of Everything. So obviously,
you are interested in this general idea. It's another question whether what we mean by theory
of everything, and so on. But obviously, it's something that is very much on the mind of a lot
of physicists these days, right? And actually, not on these days, but for many decades. And so,
in physics, that's grand unified theory, theory of everything is something that people talk about
all the time, right? So then the question then is, okay, so what about mathematics? Do we have a
grand unified theory in any sense? And so in what sense the Langlands program is a grand unified theory?
And so I thought I would just take a moment to discuss the difference between physics and mathematics.
I think it's a very central point, which is actually missed by a lot of people, because somehow,
there is sort of like, people kind of merge the two and kind of like don't differentiate them enough.
People as in the general public or mathematicians?
Even the ones, well, I would say mathematicians, physicists do know, but in general public,
this line between the two is not clearly marked somehow in the minds of most people. I think it's
important to talk about this, to understand. It's essential, because this way, we can understand
all kinds of recent controversies, for instance, about string theory. Because as you and I talked
about about a year ago on your podcast, in my opinion, string theory has been great for mathematics,
but it has not been great for physics. So see, there is a difference between the two, because
the original promise of string theory was to give us the unified theory of this universe,
and it failed spectacularly, doing so. But it's not all bad. In other words, yes, it has helped
mathematicians to come up with some interesting ideas, and it's pushed mathematics. So if we blur the
lines between math and physics, we will say string theory is a success, right? So that's why it's very
important to understand that mathematicians and physicists actually have different goals,
different tools, different tools, and there are different expectations, different responsibilities,
if you will. So what is the difference? Let's talk about this. Yeah? Sure. Okay. So let me go back to
the beginning of my slides. And so I want to talk about the unification because, you know, what does the
idea of unification in mathematics actually mean? And so I want to start with a famous quote by Galileo.
At the times of Galileo, the two things were really close to each other, natural sciences and mathematics.
And Galileo famously wrote, the book of nature is written in the language of mathematics.
Right? And he continued, the characters in the language are triangles, circles, and other geometric
figures without which it's impossible to understand a single word, without which one is left wandering
in a dark labyrinth. So in other words, mathematics is a language of nature. Okay? So now let's talk about,
so let's talk about physics. In physics, we have this nomenclature. We have unified field theory,
which actually started with early attempts by Albert Einstein to unify general relativity,
which described his theory describing the force of gravity. And electromagnetism, there were only two
forces of nature known at the time. Then eventually physicists found that there are two other forces,
the weak and strong, the nuclear forces, subatomic forces. And we have now the standard model, which
describes three out of four known forces of nature, electromagnetic weak and strong, with spectacular
experimental success. But of course, a lot of questions remain. For example, it has a Lagrangian
of standard model has something like 19 parameters. A lot of people are not satisfied with it. They feel that
there are much deeper theories yet to be discovered, right? And so the grand unified theory in physics
refers to an attempt to merge these forces into a single unified force, including gravity. So for now,
we don't have a quantum field theory of gravity. String theory promised us to give one, but they failed
in doing so during the period of 40 years. And it looks like, it doesn't look very good.
If you had to bet, I think you shouldn't put your money on this. Investment advice. Don't put any money on this.
Maybe short it, you know, like in the markets, you could buy stock, we can short it. So shorting is probably
still a good idea. But I think the stock has come down quite a lot, because more and more people kind of
wake up from this dream and kind of like, look, look at the reality of the situation and say, look,
you know, we have to move on to other things. All right.
Just a moment. Do you say that with any reservation because you've published in string
theory in the past, or you've published with one of the most famous string theorists?
Ah, that's a good one. So speaking of Forrest Gump, right? So not only did I publish with Langlands
and all these other people that I've mentioned, I also published a paper with Ed Witten,
okay? In 2007, around the time when this book that I mentioned was published. But see,
this is the thing. With Witten, we published a paper about mathematical ideas involved in string
theory. And actually it was not even string theory, but more like quantum field theory
in higher dimensions, you see. Well, high dimensions is not a proper term. You see, string theory kind of
turns things upside down because in string theory, the field theory which is involved is a two-dimensional
field theory because you're considering propagation of strings, right? And what is a string? It's like
a circle. And when it moves, it sweeps an area. So it sweeps something two-dimensional. So in effect,
you're studying embeddings of what we'll discuss later called these objects called Riemann surfaces.
Think of the surface of a donut or of a Danish pastry or a sphere, okay? They're maps or embeddings
into the space-time. So the space-time is on the receiving end of these maps, but the theory itself
is defined on the surface, you see, on the Riemann surface. That's weird because you're taking the
two-dimensional field theory in which the target space is the space-time. Normally we take…
Yes. …the theory is defined on the space-time. So the roles kind of switch, which is kind of like,
it's really cool if you think about it. Now, but string theory is not just a theory of a quantum
field theory on a Riemann surface, because in string theory, once you study these models,
the quantum field theory is defined on surfaces. That's not enough. That's the first step. The
second step is to integrate over all possible Riemann surfaces.
And that involves summation over all possible topological types like sphere or
surface of a donut and so on. They call… The parameter, the topological parameter is called
the genus. So sphere is of genus zero. A torus is of genus one. The Danish pastry
with two holes is of genus two. The pretzel is of genus three. So you have to sum up
the results corresponding to each topological type of Riemann surface. And then for each of them,
you have to sum up over all possible complex structures, basically. In fact, you have to sum
up over all the metrics, but because the theory is what's called conformally invariant, you actually
end up with a finite-dimensional integral over what's called the moduli space of complex structures
on the Riemann surface. So string theory is not just a two-dimensional quantum field theory defined
on a specific Riemann surface. So if you imagine some two-dimensional world, you know, like some bugs,
let's say you have like a globe in your apartment or in your house, and you have a little spider who
lives on that globe. So that spider's space… Well, it's more space than space-time, but okay,
let's forgive me for this difference. Let's assume that the space-time of the spider is a sphere,
is the surface of the globe. So then the quantum theory that the spider would observe if it were
indeed her space-time would be a two-dimensional theory defined on a specific Riemann surface,
namely the surface of this globe. You see what I mean? Yes.
But that's not string theory yet. String theory is when you can see the spiders living on all possible
Riemann surfaces, and every calculation you sum up over what happens across all of them. So that's
string theory. So that's a very simple explanation of the difference between quantum field theory and
string theory. So first of all, quantum field theory is not defined on the space-time. Rather,
space-time is on the receiving end of maps from a two-dimensional surface to the space-time. So the
theory effectively is two-dimensional. Then the theory is what's called conformal invariant, which
allows, which gives us a possibility to actually sum up over all possible choices over Riemann's
surface. And it's when you sum up, you get amplitudes from string theory, you see. So that's,
and you have to admit that it's a very cool idea. It's a very cool idea. You turn things upside down,
kind of, that your space-time becomes the target space of the theory. It's not the space,
the ground of the theory. It's a kind of additional ingredient of the theory. The theory itself is
defined on Riemann's surfaces. But it's sort of like, it's a cool idea, but at the same time, it's
actually kind of like precipitates its own demise, the string theory, because then the question is,
which space-time do you have to choose, you see? So it does not lock you, because you don't define your
theory on your space-time that is given to you, which is this our universe, which has three spatial
and one time dimension, but it becomes a parameter, right, of your theory. And so,
but the point is that it's an essential condition is that the theory be conformally invariant
on the Riemann's surfaces, which means that all the metrics, that if you rescale your metrics locally,
then you will get the same result. And this enables you to go from an integration over some
infinite dimensional spaces, which is basically intractable, to actually finite dimensional spaces.
Instead of the integration of all metrics, what's called metrics on the Riemann's surface, you go to
the integral over all complex structures, which is a finite dimensional manifold, so that the integral
in principle could be computed, even though there are all kinds of singularities that need to be
regularized, which no one, as far as I know, has been able to do in general, actually. But at least
there is a path to doing it. But the problem is that your space-time is a kind of an external thing
that you put into the theory. And the question is, how do you differentiate between them? How do you say,
oh, our space-time has to be this? And so one condition is that the theory has to be conformally
invariant, and that means that it's Halabiyao. So you probably heard this said many times,
that the target space of string theory is a Halabiyao manifold. Halabiyao manifold is one for
which the corresponding two-dimensional theory of maps from your Riemann's surface, say a donut,
surface of a donut, a sphere, and so on, to your space-time is conformally invariant.
But the problem is that there are too many Halabiyao's, and the problem is the string theory is
only when defined when this manifold is 10-dimensional. Super string theory, to be precise,
super string theory. For string theory, it would have to be 26-dimensional. So it's a much bigger
gap from what we observe to what string theory allows you to work with. So the first string
revolution in the 1980s was going from bosonic string theory to supersymmetric string theory,
where you have a sort of a balance between bosons and fermions, which enable to bring the dimension
down to 10. And 10 is much closer to four than 26. So you have six extra dimensions. And then this
would say, okay, well, the six dimensions that curl onto this little Kalabiyao manifold,
but which one? And the problem is nobody has been able to find. And the problem is also that it's not
just a single one, but it's moving also with the dynamics of the theory, this Kalabiyao manifold,
this extra six dimensions is also changing. And nobody was able to find, and those changes
lead to some long range forces, which nobody has been able to observe. So therefore it's like
immediately in contradiction with experiment, not to mention that it's supersymmetric. So you have to,
and we don't observe supersymmetry in this universe. So anyway, that was a long kind of
aside digression on string theory, just to show you what the problem is. If you're a physicist,
this is a major issue because your job, your job, you only have one job, if you're a physicist.
Yes.
Well, and I mean, quantum physics, obviously, there are other areas of physics, like solid
state physics, statistical physics, and so on, where models are much more diverse. But if you
are a quantum physicist who works, you know, on finding the theory of everything, or you know,
grand unified theory.
If you're a high energy physicist in fundamental physics.
If you're a high energy, the high energy physicist, you only have one job, which is to describe
this damn universe. That's your job. You don't, you're not interested in describing all possible
universes, 10 dimensional and so on. But mathematicians are interested in all of them.
So that's the difference between us. That's the major difference. As a mathematician,
I love 10 dimensional manifolds, or 10 dimensional spaces, if you will.
Yes, exactly.
They're just as good. They're my children, just like four dimensional space times.
I don't differentiate between them. I love all of them, you see. So,
or even infinite dimensional spaces. So for, to put it, to put it, you know, briefly,
mathematician is interested in a space of any dimension. A high energy physicist is only
interested in four dimensional spaces. And not just some generic spaces, but the ones which are
realized in this universe. Now, there may be some other universes, which are 10 dimensional,
and maybe this theory describes those universes. Okay, first of all, you know, how do you find out,
it's true, you know, do you have like, pick up a phone and they talk to some aliens who
live in 10 dimensional and say, congratulations, you have found the grand unified theory of our
universe. Congratulations. But what good is it for us? Now, I have to also add, there is also another
aspect that by doing this more general theories, you can actually stumble upon some ideas, which you
may find it more difficult to, you know, understand in the realistic theory, and then you can try to
adopt it, to tweak it, to apply to this universe. So for instance, lower dimensional theories are usually
simpler than higher dimensional theories. So for instance, two dimensional theories have been a great
playground for physicists to try to develop ideas or some three dimensional theories as well. There's a
famous work by Alexander Polikov, a brilliant, you know, Russian Soviet physicist about instantons and
three dimensional gauge theories, which became classic because it gives you mechanism of how
instantons contribute to correlation functions, which we still don't understand how to apply in
four dimensions. And if we could, we would be able to solve the confinement problem trying to understand
why quarks cannot be separated when, as you, you know, as you move them apart, which is a feature of
four dimensional gauge theory. This is just one example. There's this phenomenon called instantons,
which is understood much better in three dimensions and in two dimensions than it is in four dimensions.
But this is that province, that area of research where you try different models in other dimensions
is called mathematical physics proper, really. That's the overlap. If you think of a Venn diagram,
I said Zenn diagram, well, Venn diagram, okay? Something else.
Venn diagram is something else. So if you look at the Venn diagram of mathematics and physics,
yes, there is this overlap and that's called mathematical physics. So all my life, I was very
interested in that because, you know, I actually, as a kid, I was actually very interested in high
energy physics and quarks and so on. And then I learned that actually you have to understand mathematics
to even speak about those theories. And as I delve deeper and deeper into math, I realized that I
actually love mathematics proper, but also occasionally... It was SU-3 that got you inspired.
SU-3, that's right. The quarks, the description of elementary particles in terms of quarks, which
goes back to Maury Gelman and this Russian mathematician Zweig as well. So anyway, my work
with Witten was kind of in mathematical physics because it was about understanding certain models
which are closely related to quantum field theory and potential string theory as well.
But it doesn't... For example, those models are supersymmetric.
The geometric Langlands conjecture that Witten worked on, it is in four dimensions though.
Yes. In a sense, yes. But yes, true. But supersymmetric theories, that's what I'm trying to say.
People think, the general public thinks of supersymmetry as just one supersymmetry, but there are
extensions. There are perversions of supersymmetry. So there are called...
N equals two, N equals three, extensions. That's right. So typically we study N equals
one, N equals two, N equals four. And that's called maximal supersymmetry. So supersymmetry,
by the way, is a very simple idea. It's just that you have one of the requirements of quantum
field theory is the invariance under the Poincaré group, right? The Poincaré group combines the
Lorentz group, which is kind of all rotations or pseudo rotations in Minkowski space, right? And translations,
so Poincaré group is built as a semi-direct product of the Lorentz group and the group of translations.
In supersymmetric, everything in your theory has to be invariant under this action. So for instance,
the space of fields, the space of states has to be what's called a representation of this group,
of the Poincaré group. In a supersymmetric theory, this representation has to be extended to a bigger
group, but in fact, not a group. It's called supergroup because it has both bosonic degrees
of freedom and fermionic degrees of freedom. The bosonic degrees of freedom will stay the same. It
will be the same Poincaré group, but there will be some fermionic transformations, the kind of weird
little transformations. They're kind of like little shifts. They are not even bona fide transformations
in the ordinary way. And so this way you get an enlarged supergroup, which, depending on its size,
is classified as n equal one, n equal two, n equal three, n equal four. But the biggest one you can get,
given all the requirements of quantum field theory, is n equal four. And that's the theory we're
talking about. That's the theory which exhibits what's called electromagnetic duality, gauge theory,
super-young-mills or super-gauge theory, n equal four, in four dimensions, exhibits something that's
closely connected to the geometric Langland's correspondence, which is called electromagnetic
duality. So anyway, this was just to put things in perspective of how similar phenomena actually arise
in both mathematics and physics. Although today, this phenomenon that we're talking about, the
Langland's correspondence, or Langland's program, or Langland's duality, or Langland's conjecture,
can use all these terms, they actually, so far, we only know how to apply them to supersymmetric
theories. So therefore, it's not physics proper, it's mathematical physics. You see what I mean?
Yes. Okay, but now let's go back to this idea of unification. So in physics, in theoretical physics,
proper, not mathematical physics, like string theory, but real physics, okay? So I'm not,
and I'm not trying to offend anybody. I'm just saying, real physics means, and I'm not a physicist,
so I'm kind of looking from outside. I have no horse in this race, to be honest with you. I'm just like,
I'm kind of independent observer. And all I know is theoretical physics, you have to describe this
universe. And I don't think anyone would argue with that. So then, in the perspective of
theoretical physics, there are these notions of standard model, grand unified theory,
and theory of everything, TOE, okay? That's the one which unifies all forces.
So I guess, yes, grand unified theory. That last one sounds familiar.
It sounds familiar, right? I mean, so, but I have to say, G-U-T, grand unified theory,
usually references kind of a better understanding of the standard model. So it's still three forces. So TOE
means that you include gravity. I think that's the nomenclature. Okay.
Yes.
And so now, this is a beautiful quote from Einstein,
which is something he said during his Nobel lecture, when he received the Nobel Prize in 1923.
He said, the intellect seeking after an integrated theory cannot rest content with the assumption
that there exist two distinct fields totally independent from each other by their nature. So
that's the impulse, which is a very natural human impulse. You want to simplify things,
you want to reduce things to something to believe that at a deeper level, there is only one phenomenon
that manifests itself in many different ways, right? Well, to be fair, he does say,
if you're seeking after an integrated theory, so by saying integrated theory, he already has the
assumption that you can't have two distinct parts. That's right. So you could say that you could be like,
because there's a, there's a philosopher named Nancy Cartwright, who says there are different models
of the world. And one is the integrated approach. Another one is a patchwork approach, where it's
akin to open sets that overlap. And in the overlapping region, you just have to have compatibility,
but they could be incompatible else outside of that. And then furthermore, you could have regions
where there is no law.
No, no, I agree. I agree. Absolutely agree. And in fact, in mathematics, it's more like that.
In mathematics, we do not seek. So that was my next point. In mathematics, we do not seek to have an
integrated theory of everything. We do not actually.
I didn't mean to preempt your point.
So yes. So in a, in a sense, what you described is more like how mathematicians approach it. But you
see, a lot of it also has a social element. So when we brought up and I can speak for myself,
because, you know, I, I, I studied mathematics since I was a kid, you know, and I went through,
you know, school, graduate school and so on. And so I can say that,
never ever at any moment were my teachers telling me, Edward, find the grand unified
theory of mathematics. It was never an issue. Nobody, first of all, I think it's impossible.
You have just, mathematics is just so diverse. There's just so many different subjects. It's like,
I like to talk about them. You know, this is another analogy I used in Love and Maths,
the continents of mathematics. So there is like number theory, there is harmonic analysis,
there's functional analysis, there's geometry, there is algebra and so on, right? So,
and they are all connected somehow, but it's not like one field will subsume all other fields.
We don't have that idea. But physicists, I've spoken to a lot of my colleagues, physicists,
oh yes, when they study, there is a lot of premium on this idea that maybe I'll be the one
to come up with the theory of everything. So I'm, I actually, I'm hopeful that the next generation of
physicists will see through this and understand that in some ways it is, it gives you kind of a kick,
it gives you kind of, it makes it more fun, it's more competitive, but also there is a great downside.
And quite honestly, I think that the debacle with string theory is in many ways, the result of,
of this sort of attempt to subjugate everything to what you already know, you see, and then discard
all other ideas and say that they are, they are not serious, they are, their ideas are propagated by
amateurs and stuff like that. Instead of looking in the mirror and kind of like understanding what am I,
what am I doing here? And on what ground am I to claim that the theory I'm working on is the only
game in town, which was an expression used by many string theorists for a long time.
It still is.
So, um, well, you know, one day, you know, it's like reality intrudes. So like you can pretend that
it's not there, but reality will look at you in the face every day and will say, okay, Edward,
when are you going to accept reality? And one day you will have to, or you will die not accepting it,
then other people will come and do it for you. You see what I mean?
Just a moment. What, why do you think? Because the string theorists will say that,
look, in the past in physics, when we've been onto something, it did produce mathematical results as
well. Now look in string theory, while it's not producing physical results, at least not
experimentally testable in our range currently, it's producing plenty of mathematical results.
And we could use that as some proxy indication that we're onto the right physics. What do you say to that?
I disagree. I just explained the difference between mathematics and physics. So what they're,
what string theory does is it, where the string theory has been positive is in the area of
mathematical physics, because it points us to some very interesting phenomena in a whole range of
theories, which have nothing to do with our universe, you see. And that's useful for many reasons.
Number one, it helps pure mathematics.
And the string theory has been tremendously helpful to mathematicians. It has led us to some,
onto some paths, which we probably would not have discovered in the 20th or 21st century. So in other
words, it was some kind of mathematics just, just fell on mathematicians' lap in the 20th, 21st century,
because it was inspired by string theory. Yes. Also, these, these ideas, these theories,
some 10 dimensional, with 10 dimensional space time, they are not useless at all. They are useful
because studying those theories, you are, you observe some phenomena, which can help you eventually
to come up with realistic theory of this universe. There are these things like electromagnetic duality,
which we're going to talk about, which is connected to the Langlands program. There are things like ADS,
CFT, which are absolutely beautiful mathematically, but not only mathematically, because they are the
phenomena in theories, which are in the same class as quantum field theory describing this universe.
You see, they're different because they are different dimensions, they are super symmetric,
and so on. So they're not, they're not quite fitting the clothes that you have to put on. But you have to
put on the clothes of your universe. Otherwise, it's, it's, it's not physics. You see, that's, that's,
that's a very simple thing. Yes, it's true that you could say that in the first 10 years of development
of string theory, that its success in mathematics gives you a kind of confidence that you should keep
going and working on it, because there must be something there. But after 40 years, after 40, actually
more than 40 now, because we're talking, yeah, about 40, I would say, yeah, 85 would be the first thing.
This is the first super string revolution. Super string, and then they saw the, the constellation,
the Green-Schwarz constellation of anomalies. That was brilliant, a brilliant work that gave
people, and I understand the human element of it. Of course, you get carried away. Of course,
you get excited. Of course, you want to run around, like, who was it, Archimedes who jumped out of a
bathtub when they understood how the bodies float. Of course, you want to jump and run around naked and
say, guys, it's amazing. I have come up with this incredible discovery. I understand it.
And of course, please do that, but not for 40 years. I mean, after 10, 20 years,
and I think the crucial moment was about 2012, when LHC was fully online, and it was clear that
there's no site of supersymmetric super partners. That was the time for reckoning in the field. That
was the time for kind of a serious conversation where the adults, the elders of the theory should
have talked, should have come out and said, look, you know, it's not working out, and allow other
ideas to come in. That's the problem. The problem is not just, yeah, please, of course, keep working
on it. But when you deny resources to everybody else, then it becomes a bigger issue. Now, I don't
want to spend the whole conversation talking about string theory. I think it's important to talk about
it because I am on record on your podcast a year ago, on the heels of my keynote talk, keynote lecture,
or it's called challenge talk, at the big string theory conference at the Perimeter Institute near
Toronto, I guess near where you are, in July of last year, where I saw up close this community,
and I saw up close what's going on, and I was very disturbed by it. So then I went on your podcast,
and I spoke about the failure, what I call the failure of the original promise of string theory.
So in today's conversation, I would like to bring up the connection between the Langlands
correspondence, which is the main, or the Langlands program, which is the main topic of our conversation,
and electromagnetic dualities in supersymmetric Young-Mills theories, four-dimensional
superhuman theories. So some people, some viewers, may be puzzled by this. So how can this guy
be criticizing string theory? And at the same time, he's saying that, you know, that it's very
interesting to study these supersymmetric theories. So that's why I took some time to explain
this major difference in the approaches of mathematicians and physicists, as well as
mathematical physicists, what is appropriate, what's not appropriate, and where you have responsibility
as a physicist to make sure that your results actually apply to this universe and not claim
something that is not there. Because a lot of, you know, I'm not going to call names, but you can
easily find quotes where people are saying string theory has unified Einstein's theory of gravity with
quantum field theory. Yes, it has in 10 dimensions. And even then, it's still incomplete because of various
issues which have not been addressed because it's only defined perturbatively, and so on. But let's just say
that yes, in 10 dimensions, they have combined, but they don't put that in the sentence, they say we have
combined, you see, and it's a lie. If you just say it this way, quite frankly, and like the first time you
say it is kind of cute, but like, after 40 years, after 40 years, it's a lie. If you keep saying that, and if you
keep giving yourself a plus plus plus as one of the major figures in string theory did in the recent public event, a plus plus plus is
how he is a grade. Oh, I don't know about that. Is a grade. Yeah. Wow. Interesting. Wow. A plus plus plus.
You know, I usually, when I teach, I give a plus and I, you know, kind of like, okay, let's know, be realistic. Like I never
give a plus plus, especially for someone who actually couldn't solve any problem in the exam, you know,
but that's just me. So I wanted to explain this difference. It's important. In mathematics, we don't
have this issue. Any consistent mathematical theory is valid. It doesn't have to be in four
dimensional space time. It can be 10 dimensional space time. That's why mathematicians love string
theory, but it doesn't mean that physicists should love it. Understood. Okay. All right.
Let's move on. So there is another aspect of it, which is that physical theories get updated
and mathematical theories appear to be objective, necessary, and timeless. How do you explain that?
That's a mystery to me. So what does mathematics actually describe? And the point is that there
are a lot of concepts and ideas and mathematics, which a priori have nothing to do with the physical
universe, with nature. In other words, they don't fit into the four dimensional space time, you see.
So for instance, in this geometrical angle correspondence, we talk about sheaves, not even functions,
which are kind of like, okay, function is something that is rooted deeply in the physical reality.
For instance, think about temperature. At every point in the room, there is a certain number,
which is a temperature at that room, or barometric pressure. And so to every point,
you assign a number, and that's what mathematicians call a function. So functions are very much,
you know, bread and butter of physics. But sheaves, like, when was the last time you saw a sheave on the
street, you know? So that's just one example. Or infinite dimensional hybrid spaces, or periodic
numbers, like these numerical systems, these esoteric numerical systems that are bread and butter of
mathematics, and yet we don't observe them in the physical reality. So then, if so, what could
unification mean for mathematics, you see? And so my favorite example is that I say, you know, if Leo
Tolstoy did not write Anna Karenina, nobody else would have written exactly the same novel. But if
Pythagoras did not live or did not discover his theorem, we would still have Pythagoras' theorem. It
would still be A squared plus B squared equals C squared and not equal C cubed. And it stays the same
for the last 2,500 years. And by the way, it was actually, as it turns out, it was discovered by others
in other places, like in Babylon, in Mesopotamia, in China, even before Pythagoras. And it hasn't
changed. Whereas, for instance, our theory of gravity got updated 100 years ago, going from Newtonian
theory of gravity to Einstein theory of gravity. So there's something very special about mathematics.
Some mathematicians believe that there is this platonic world of mathematical ideas named after the
Greek philosopher Plato, who, I must say, was really following in the footsteps of Pythagoras.
These ideas really go back to Pythagoras, in my opinion. And so the question then is usually posed is,
do we discover mathematics or do we invent it? And I used to be squarely on the side of like,
it is discovered. In other words, there is this ideal world of mathematical objects and concepts.
And we just go there somehow, almost like ESP, like extrasensory perception, like mathematicians go there
and to this ideal world and discover and bring back the fruits of, you know, of those from that world.
Mind you, a no smaller figure than Charles Darwin actually wrote that mathematicians are endowed with
in extra sense. He actually wrote that. Closer to the end of his life, he wrote that he regretted not
to have studied mathematics more as a young adult or as a child, because he wrote, and that I think is
a direct quote, mathematicians are endowed with an extra sense. So there is this perception. And I have to
say, as a working mathematician, you do feel it. So a friend of mine recently asked me, like,
how do you experience it? How do you experience the mathematical discovery?
And so the best I could come up with is that, you know, imagine like there is this deep fog.
So you know there's something there, but you don't know what. And then occasionally, some part of it,
the mist kind of starts dissolving. And you see the contours, the contours of the trees or a castle
or some exotic animals. And then maybe it will close again. But that's the sense that you have.
You don't feel that you invent something. You don't feel that you come up with something just
on your own. You feel like it's always been there, but obscured by our inability to see it. It was
invisible, kind of. So there is this sense. But now I kind of also feel that mathematics is a human
activity. And therefore, I'm reluctant these days to just say, yeah, it's discovered. It's just out
there. Because who discovers these mathematical ideas? Human mathematicians, right? And so, as far
as we know, maybe some other animals too. And apparently, some animals can count up to a certain
number. Some can't and so on. But for now, all the mathematics that we know came from human beings.
So there's something to be said about that. And so I'm kind of like,
now I feel it's a mystery. It's one of those questions where it's neither and both. Like an
electron is both a particle and a wave. Neither and both. Kind of like that. But it's a very
interesting thing to think about and contemplate. So Kurt Gödel, actually, the great logician,
the greatest logician of all time, as far as I'm concerned, wrote that mathematical ideas form an
objective reality of their own, which we cannot create or change, but only perceive and describe.
Of course, this is very close to the conversation about artificial intelligence and so on. But I'm
not going to go there, because we want to get to the language program. So well, I have this one
example of the universality of mathematics, I don't know if we should go there or should
move more fast faster to the to the...
Do you want to say it quickly?
Yeah. So there is this idea about numbers. So just to give you a sense of how weird mathematics is,
weird in a good way, I want to pose this question. Is there only one mathematics or there are like
different... Imagine there's another universe, not another universe, like another exoplanet,
like there is another civilization, and they have their own mathematics. What if we meet and we start
comparing our nodes? Is it possible that their mathematics is totally different? And so the
traditional argument that it may be so goes like this. Imagine that this new civilization has like
many different aliens, and then you can imagine all kinds of pictures of these aliens. So then they
are like us because we see other people kind of like similar to us. So naturally, we start counting
things. So numbers arise from the idea that there are many things which are kind of similar to each
other, right? But what if you have like a Solaris-type intelligence? Solaris was a novel by Stanislav Lehm,
a great bullish science fiction writer, and it's been made into film by Andrei Tarkovsky, and then also
was a Hollywood remake of this movie. I highly recommend the Tarkovsky version, where the intelligence
was this is one thing. It was this whole planet was intelligent. So then the argument goes, okay,
for that intelligence, there's no reason to come up with numbers because they only observe one of it.
There's no need for it to develop the idea of numbers because it cannot count. There are no
essential things to count. But I have an answer to that, and I want to explain how Solaris-like
intelligence would actually discover numbers, not by counting the way we usually do or the way we
teach our kids, which by the way, I think it's a very, there's some subtle points there that we are
not properly teaching additional multiplication, but that's another story. Let me not go there at
the moment, but I can talk about it later. Okay.
So here is an alternative way to discover numbers. Here's an alternative way to discover numbers,
which is more clean in some sense, and kind of devoid of the deficiencies of the traditional way of
teaching kids numbers through counting. Namely, we can discover them through binding. You see,
so this is, this comes from what's called topology. So this, I have a flaw here to demonstrate.
So the point is that I can take, I put it on my finger, and then I can go around. I can go once,
it can go twice, it can go three times, four times, and so on. So if it's an infinitely long floss,
in principle, I can wind this string any number of times. So this way I represent all natural numbers,
one, two, three, four, and so on. But also observe that I can represent negative numbers if I go in the
opposite direction. Instead of going this way, I can go this way. And so this way I can actually
introduce all integers without counting, just as a, by realizing that the topological structure,
that if I cannot unwind things, because for to unwind, I would have to move the string through my
finger. So if I, if I'm not allowed to move my string through my finger, then there is a distinction
between winding the string once or twice, three times, or a negative number.
In the Solaris case, what would be the analogy? The solar prominences?
So the analogy in the Solaris case is that instead of wrapping a circle onto itself,
you can think of my finger, first of all, you don't need the whole finger, you can just look at the
section of the finger, right? So kind of the intersection of my finger with a plane. And then
you can look at this picture that I put out on the slide, where basically the circle is just wrapping
onto itself like many times, right? And so, but likewise, the sphere can wrap onto itself many times.
This is, this is much harder to imagine because you see, you can easily see it from the four-dimensional
perspective, but in 3D, it's very hard to imagine a sphere wrapping onto itself, but you kind of can
grasp it by analogy that just like a circle wrapping on itself, gives us an invariant, what might be called
an invariant, topological invariant, which is the winding number. Likewise, there is an invariant of a map
between a sphere, from a sphere to a sphere. And the coverings of sphere by sphere is also labeled by
all integers, because also there are two orientations possible, so you get both positive numbers,
negative numbers. This is a rough rendering of what this might look like. This is an example of what's
called a homotopy group. So in fact, here, this corresponds to the pi one, the fundamental group,
the first homotopy group. And here, we're talking about pi two. Every time you have a sphere,
you're talking about pi two, the second homotopy group. When you have a circle, you talk about pi one,
and that's the first homotopy group, also known as a fundamental group. Anyway, this is just a kind of
something to realize how many interesting aspects of mathematics there are, which go far beyond what we
use ordinarily, like counting. So what it shows is that the same concept can actually arise from
different continents of mathematics. In the first approach, you get two numbers through counting,
so kind of from the point of view of number theory, right? But in the second approach...
This seems to be evidence for the discovery of mathematics.
Right. Discovery, but this is a baby version of unification. That's what I mean by unification
in mathematics, that numbers, natural numbers, or whole numbers, actually live on the intersection
of two fields, number theory and topology, you see. You can discover the same numbers
from these two different points of view. And to me, that's an example of unification. In other words,
you're not trying to say that topology is subsumed by number theory or the other way around,
but you observe that there are certain phenomena which are reflected in both fields or which are
manifested in both fields. And that's why it's prized in mathematics to have this type of situation,
because it gives you a different perspective. It's like you're looking at the same object,
but from a different angle. And this is where a lot of great discoveries are made,
when you're able to realize the same thing from these two different angles,
or more, two, three, or more different angles. So for me, mathematics is like a giant jigsaw puzzle,
where you're kind of trying to build this picture from the small pieces without really knowing what
this final picture is going to look like. And so when you solve a jigsaw puzzle with your friends,
usually the strategy is to try to build small islands. So you find a few pieces that fit together,
and you try to enlarge them, and your friends do the same. And so then at some point, you kind of
build several islands in this picture, right, which kind of like looks consistent. But the greatest
advance happens when you know how to fit different islands together, when you play jigsaw puzzle. And
it is like that, that's what the language program comes in. So language program is like this, is a set
of ideas which suggest how different continents could fit together. That's kind of like a brief
summary of what it's about. Great.
So that's like, so then what are the continents that we're talking about? And so you have number
theory, which is obvious, you have harmonic analysis, which is this very important idea in
mathematics, which is that you can decompose different signals as a superposition, a signal,
you can decompose a signal as a superposition of some basic signals. And basic signals are given by
what's called harmonics, that they have frequencies, which are multiples of each other.
Oh, okay. So for people who are familiar with the terms, fourier series, this would be an
example of a series, what I'm talking, what I'm referencing right now is the idea of fourier series,
where you can write a given function as a combination, sometimes infinite, of sine and cosine
functions, but not just two sine x cosine x, but sine n x and cosine n x, where n is a whole number is an
integer. So the different sine functions have graphs which look like this. But if you as you increase n,
it becomes more and more squished. And so that corresponds to a higher and higher pitch in the
sound. Right. And so we know that in the chromatic scale,
essentially the frequencies are different by rational numbers. No, not quite. There is a gap,
there is this wolf tone and so on. But roughly speaking, you can generate them from going up an
octave where the frequency doubles and going to the Pythagorean fifth, where the frequency gets
multiplied by approximately three halves. And by using this, you can then realize other nodes with a small
gap at the end somewhere by rational number. But if it's by rational, it means you can always find
kind of a smallest denominator frequency so that every other frequency is a multiple of it.
So that brings you into that framework that I was talking about, where you consider nodes with
frequencies which are multiples of each other, integer multiples of each other. And then if you think
about an orchestra playing, then the sound of an orchestra is a combination of sounds of different
instruments. And each sound of an instrument at any moment is a note, is a particular note, and that
note has a frequency. And so you can think of this decomposition of breaking into pieces of a sound
as decomposition of a signal into a combination of different nodes, each of them with its own
intensity. And that's the idea of Fourier analysis of Fourier series. So that's the subject which
studies this type of decomposition. So what do you need here? You need a particular space of functions
and you need some preferred functions, some special functions, a collection of functions like sine
nx and cosine nx. And then they should be rich enough to give you every function as a superposition.
It also has a continuous analog, which is called a Fourier integral, as opposed to Fourier series.
These bubbles appear, by the way. It liked what you were saying.
These bubbles, it means that the AI overlords are liking what I'm saying, which is great.
It did some harmonic analysis on that. It's at a meta level realizing.
It's harmonic, right?
It's in sync with it. Yes.
That's good.
Okay. So you're outlining, there's a harmonic analysis, there's topology,
there's number theory or numbers.
Geometry. So you have this Riemann surface we talked about earlier when I talked about string theory,
for example. And so what is the Langlands program? The Langlands program is this giant project
aimed at finding common patterns in different fields of mathematics. And so the original formulation by
Langlands in the 1960s, in 1967, in that letter to Andre Vey, which I mentioned was actually about
connecting two specific fields, number theory on one side and harmonic analysis on the other side,
but not harmonic analysis in the, in the naive sense of just Fourier series on the circle,
so to speak, or on the line. You see, that's just the kind of a baby version of harmonic analysis.
You can have harmonic analysis for other spaces, multi-dimensional spaces, instead of the real
line, where the role of the sine functions and the cosine functions will be played by some other
functions. And the example which is relevant to this is the example of what's called modular forms,
modular forms on the upper half plane or on the complex disk. We'll talk about this in a moment.
So now, if it were just that, if the Langlands program was just that, connecting questions in
number theory to questions in harmonic analysis probably wouldn't get as much attention. But
what happened is that over the years, people in other fields of mathematics started discovering very
similar patterns as well. And so therefore, we actually have Langlands program developing not only
in the original formulation, but also in these other fields, which I'm going to talk about. And so that
now to circle back to this recent achievement in the geometric Langlands correspondence,
what's the geometric Langlands correspondence? The geometric Langlands correspondence appeared
as a particular way of generalizing these ideas, original ideas of Langlands, of connecting number
theory and harmonic analysis, and adopting them in the world of Riemann surfaces. Riemann surfaces like this.
And the reason why it's connected to physics is because, as I explained, so there are these models of
quantum physics where you also have Riemann surfaces, you see. So that's two-dimensional,
and then you have to make a leap, you have to, there is a way to connect four-dimensional young
mills to the theories defined on these Riemann surfaces. So that's another step. But that's roughly
why. So why geometric Langlands is relevant to physics and not the original one. The original one has to
do with number theory, whereas the geometric one has to do with geometry of Riemann surfaces, and that's
much closer to the kind of stuff that physicists, high energy physicists are studying, or quantum
physicists are studying, you see. All right. So that's the picture of Langlands that I already showed
before. So I would say that Langlands program is kind of about building bridges between different
continents of mathematics. And as a baby version of it, think about the example I gave with numbers.
Natural numbers or whole numbers appear both from counting and from homotopy groups, the winding
in topology. So that's a bridge between the two fields, right? It's a kind of a rudimentary version
of unification in mathematics. Langlands program is much more sophisticated program or set of ideas
for connecting fields at a much more abstract level. And so unification, therefore, consists of
finding hidden connections, kind of invisible connections between areas of mathematics which seem
to be far apart. That's what unification is about in mathematics, not about finding one overarching
theory which subsumes everything. It's bridge making. It's bridge making. So if you are into
building bridges, then mathematics is for you. Great. All right. So now I wanted to, I can't
resist showing this. So remember I mentioned how Langlands first summarized his ideas in a letter to
André Wey. And André Wey will play an important part later on in the story. He was a great
mathematician, a French born who moved to the United States during the war and has been a professor at
the Institute for Advanced Study where Einstein was a professor as well as Langlands, Witten and so on.
So he gave, so he was the luminary in this field. And so therefore Langlands felt that he should run
these ideas by him, by André Wey. W-E-I-L is how we spell his name. It's very confusing because there
is also Hermann Weil, another great mathematician who was also at the Institute for Advanced Study at the
same time. His name is spelled W-E-Y-L and is pronounced Weil, whereas André...
Oh, is it? It's not Weil?
So André Wey that we're talking about right now, to whom Langlands wrote his letter.
His last name is pronounced... Like Weil Spinners.
Like Weil Spinners, W-E-Y-L, Spinners. Isn't that Hermann?
No, no. The Weil Spinners go to, is due to, is in honor of Herman Weil, W-E-Y-L.
Yeah.
That's right. But here we are talking about someone whose last name is spelled W-E-I-L.
Right, right, right.
And it's pronounced very differently because he is from France. So it's pronounced in a
distinctly French way without pronouncing the last letter, the last consonant. You say Weil,
André Weil. Whereas Hermann Weil was German, so his name is pronounced in a German fashion,
Weil or Weil. I'm not quite sure. More like Weil.
I think it's Weil for her.
Vile, right. Vile.
So, but not to be confused also with Andrew Weil's, W-I-L-E-S.
So as if mathematics was not already confusing, these people then come up with these names that
are really hard to tell apart, you know?
Yeah. So that's why...
So for, for people like myself and yourself, we see these all the time. It never even occurred to me
that there was also Andrew Weil's that would be confused with André Weil.
And by the way, Andrew Weil is very close to the subject. It's not like the...
If they all worked in areas which were far away from each other, that would be one thing. But
actually their works are overlapped considerably. Like Hermann Weil definitely works... Actually,
he was a kind of a polymath. He worked in so many different areas. André Weil, algebra, geometry,
number theory, and so on. So it's very close to Andrew Weil's. And for example, the proof of Fermat's
last theorem was actually based on the proof of what was called Shimura-Tanyama Weil conjecture,
where Weil actually is involved. So you have both Weil and Weil in the same sentence, you see?
So, but you know, it's okay, bear with us. So in the meanwhile...
Yes, in the meanwhile, we have this letter. We have this letter from Robert Langlands.
So Robert Langlands, imagine, he is 30 or 31. I think he's 30 years old. So this is like January of 67.
He was born in 1936, like in October, I think. So he's a 30-year-old man, very ambitious. You know,
he's a kind of a really tough guy, very full of energy. And he meets André Weil in the corridor
before some seminar, and he hands him this letter. And this letter is not just like one page,
it's like 30 pages, okay, handwritten. And what you're looking at right now is a cover page,
which was preserved in the archive of the Institute for Advanced Study, where Langlands worked for many
years. Not yet at the time. At the time, André Weil was a professor at the Institute for Advanced Study.
I think Langlands was not yet. He was a professor at Princeton University. And what does it say?
So it's hard to make out, so I will read it for you. He says, Professor Weil, in response to your
invitation to come and talk, I wrote the enclosed letter. After I wrote it, I realized there was hardly
a statement in it of which I was certain. If you're willing to read it as pure speculation,
I would appreciate that. If not, I'm sure you have a wastebasket handy. That's what it says.
I'm kind of a showman, a little bit, you know.
Yes. Also 30 pages, I would have so much anxiety sending that and thinking it may get lost in the mail.
And then what happened, my understanding is I haven't looked into this in a while. I mean,
I looked at it a lot when I was writing my book and it's quoted in the book. But my recollection is
that actually, André Weil, there was like silence. And after a week, he sent a message through his
secretary saying that, could you please type the letter? Because I cannot understand your handwriting.
Yeah. If you look at the handwriting, it's not exactly the easiest one to decipher.
Anyway, so here's where we are. So we are now in January of 1967, and we have Robert Langlands,
one of the greatest mathematicians of the 20th century. He doesn't know it yet. He's 30 years
old. André Weil was not really his mentor, but he was a towering figure in the field. And Langlands felt
that he should be the first one to judge his new ideas. So these days, he would send an email with
an attachment, you know, like PDF file to André Weil. But in those days, he actually wrote the letter
by hand. And so the other story went stratospheric. And so, but there are several steps that we have to
to get to the recent work by Gates, Goody, Ruskin, and others about the proof of the
geometric Langlands conjecture. We have to make a number of steps. And as we make those steps,
the story becomes more and more abstract and more and more sophisticated.
So I feel that I have to give an example at the outset of what this is about. Because otherwise,
it feels like, kind of like, why are we doing this? You see, I want to give an example of what
kind of questions Langlands actually was trying to solve, and in what way his ideas were so powerful
in solving them. What do you think?
Yeah, and the link to the recent work will be put on screen and in the description.
Okay. And so to explain this, we have to recall what's called the clock arithmetic. Okay. So to
explain this, we have to recall what's called the clock arithmetic and the clock arithmetic
is a, is a, an arithmetic, like on a clock where, let's say, in North America, as we go beyond 12,
we don't 12 o'clock, we don't say 13 o'clock, but we say one, one PM. We don't say 14, but we say two,
right? So we identify the numbers, which differ by multiple of 12. And we can do the same for a
clock with any number of hours. But it's especially nice to do it when the clock has P, not P hours,
where P is a prime number. Because this, then the addition and multiplication of numbers
with this identification satisfies all the usual rules of what we call a field. So, for instance,
on this picture, you have a clock with seven hours, seven is a prime number. So effectively,
the only numbers you're focusing on are zero, one, two, three, four, five, six, because seven is back,
brings you back to zero. You can add two numbers like this. If the result is in the same range,
then that's your answer. If the result is out of this range, you replace it by a number in this range,
which differs from it by seven, right? And likewise with multiplication. So that's what we
call the arithmetic modulo, a prime number, in this case, modulo number seven.
And so the next notion that we have to introduce is the notion of an elliptic curve.
So an elliptic curve, for our purposes right now, is an equation of the kind,
the cubic equation of the kind that is written on the slide. Namely, you have basically
two variables, y and x, and the highest power that you raise y to is two, and the highest power you
raise x to is three. And so that's like a normal equation, if you think about it. So what is the
solution of this equation? Solution is a pair of numbers, x and y, such that the left-hand side,
when you substitute that number y, will be equal to what you get from the right-hand side by substituting
number x, right? But the question is, what do you mean by number? And so typically, we could say,
okay, well, real numbers, right? That's a good choice. Or it could be complex numbers. If we do,
to kind of jump ahead, if we do that, if we consider solutions in complex numbers,
what we're going to get is precisely a Riemann surface. The set of solutions is more or less
less the surface of a donut. The surface of a donut is an elliptic.
It's a particular genus, not just any genus.
It's a curve of genus one, specifically.
I see.
And this curve of genus one is called elliptic curve.
Is there a straightforward way of seeing that? Or is that some result that will take us off course?
It's not immediately. Yeah, you have to do a little work. And honestly, you have to get the entire
torus. You have to also allow solutions at infinity. So without that, it will be the torus
without a point, actually. But this is what gives the name, elliptic curve is traditionally was used
as a name for this complex torus. But since we look at the same equation, and we look at solutions in
another numerical system, we also call it an elliptic curve within that context, you see.
Mm-hmm. Over a certain field.
Over a certain field. Exactly.
It's the nomenclatures over a field.
That's right.
So in other words, let's say you have a basket. You have a basket here. It has tiny balls inside.
You pull out one of the balls. It's ball number two. Pull out another one. It's ball number 10.
And another one is ball number 12. You're like, okay, this is, you look at the label. It says,
this is the integer basket. That's right.
So now you're thinking, okay, so if I was to take one of these integers, put it into my equation,
and it comes out with a solution. That's like saying, this is the elliptic curve over the
integers in that case. Now, if you have another basket and it's modulo primes, you pull it out,
it's zero, one, two, three, four, and then goes back to zero, one, two, three, four over and over.
And you have the modulo prime five, then that's solutions over that finite field. That's the term.
The phraseology is you have solutions over a field. Meaning what are the people, what are the balls
that I'm putting into my equation? What basket are they coming from? That's the field that it's over.
Exactly. Or, or we now have our new numerical system, right? This modulo p.
So we can actually look at this equation because it has coefficients, which are, you know, one and minus
one, one and minus one makes sense modulo p as well. So therefore the equation also makes sense modulo p,
where p is a prime. So now what would be a solution, say modulo seven or modulo five? It would be a
solution in which the left-hand side is not necessarily equal to the right-hand side on the nose,
but they differ by a multiple of p. Like if p is seven is multiple of seven, if p is five by a multiple
of five. You see? And so here's a problem. Find the number of solutions modulo a prime p for every
prime. And so here is an example. If you take p equals, so that's the equation, right? And so take
p equal five. So what are the solutions? For example, x equals zero, y equals zero is a solution. It's
actually a solution on the nose. Left-hand side is zero, right-hand side is zero. Or x equals one, y equals zero,
also on the nose, because this is zero and this is zero. But there are two more solutions.
What do you mean on the nose? Do you mean like it's quite obvious that it's zero?
No, they're actually equal to each other. Not only modulo five, but just as-
Oh, I see what you're saying. Okay.
As integers. You see? But here's an example of something which is not on the nose, which is x equals
zero and y equals four. Let's calculate. y squared is going to be 16, right?
Plus four, 20. Left-hand side is 20 for this choice, right? And the right-hand side is going
to be zero still. So the left-hand side is zero and the right-hand side is zero.
If we wanted to consider solutions in real numbers or in integers, then this would not be a solution
because they don't agree with each other, left-hand side and right-hand side. But in our new world of
clock arithmetic modulo five, they do agree with each other because in this new numerical system,
number 20 is the same as number zero. But modulo seven, it would not be because modulo seven,
21 is zero, but 20 is not zero. It's minus one.
Right.
You see? So that's how you see that. It is very subtle question because
the... Let's suppose you calculate how many solutions you get modulo five. In fact,
it's easy by inspection to just plug in all possible values for x and y, namely zero, one,
two, three, four into the left-hand side and right-hand side and see when the results differ by
multiple of five. You see? If you do that, you will find that these are the only solutions. So
there are four solutions. But when you move from five to seven, which is an x prime number,
and you address the same question, find the solutions, modulo seven, you see that all the
previous calculations are completely useless. Well, except maybe this first two will still give
you solutions modulo every prime. But like last two solutions, they're not going to be helpful
because the fact that the left-hand side and the right-hand side differ by multiple of five is not
going to help you to find a solution where they differ by multiple of seven. You see? So it's a very
strange kind of question where for every prime number, every prime number has its own quirks.
And for every prime number, you get a particular number of solutions. And so the question is,
can you actually describe all of them in one stroke somehow? Obviously, for very small p's,
you can just do it on a calculator. And for large p's, you can easily write a computer program,
say to do it up to 1,000, 10,000, and so on. But try to do it for all p.
And so this is where Langland's program comes in. Langland's program
gives you a completely unexpected solution to this problem all in one stroke.
And it's a really good example because it shows you the power of these ideas, because absolutely
out of the blue, out of the left field, you get the solution. So what is the solution?
So let's arrange this in the table. So for every prime number, right? So for every prime number,
like 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, we have the number of solutions, and I've calculated them for you. For
5, we found them on the previous slide, 4, and these are the numbers for other primes between 2 and 13.
But it turns out that it's better to consider not the number of solutions itself, but rather this
number, which is kind of the difference between the number of solutions and the prime itself. So
p minus the number of solutions. And the thing is that-
And how is one supposed to get this idea?
If you look at these numbers, you will see that these numbers grow almost linearly with p.
So let's just put it this way. It's a kind of an error. Because naively, you could say,
okay, it's probably about p solutions. Because after all, think about it this way. You have two,
three variables, right? And each of them takes p values. For example, if p is 5, you have 0, 1,
2, 3, 4, and then 5 is not an extra element because 5 is 0, right? So you have 5 values for x,
and you have 5 values for y. So altogether, you have 5 times 5, 25. But you have one equation,
which means one degree of freedom drops. So you have 5 squared because there are two degrees of
freedom, x and y. But there is one equation. So kind of like as a rough estimate, you could say
the number of solutions should be close to five. And number of solutions close to...
Dimension drops by one if you have an equation, right? So for instance, if you have a circle,
it's defined by one equation. Or a line, let's say a line on the plane. The plane has x and y,
two coordinates. So it's two dimensional. But if you write the equation x equals y,
you get a diagonal. So the equation drops the dimension by one. One equation drops dimension
by one. Two equations usually drop by two and so on. That's kind of like a rough back of the envelope
calculation. But one dimensional in this new world means p possibilities. Like for five, it means five
possibilities. Two dimensional means 25. Three dimensional means 125. So that's how you come up with
this rough estimate that two variables with one equation should give you approximately p solutions.
And then you say, okay, well, let's calculate what is the error. So the actual numbers, the p minus the
actual number of solutions. Then of course, once you understand the Langlands program, there is
another explanation why this is a good number to consider. There is another way to explain it,
but let's just stick with that. All right.
Okay. So now, so here's a miracle. This number is a, p. So a, p is what's in the right colon. So
it's not exactly the number of solutions, but it's the difference between p and the number of solutions.
But of course, if you know a, p, then you know the number of solutions because you simply take,
you know, the number of solutions can be found as p minus a, p. So the two problems are equivalent to
each other, right? So what we're going to describe is not numbers of solutions for every prime,
but we're going to describe these numbers a, p, but that's equivalent to the original problem.
And so it turns out that these numbers can be described all at once in the language of
harmonic analysis. So remember I said the original formulation of the Langlands program
was in relating or connecting number theory and harmonic analysis. The problem we have discussed
with counting numbers of solutions is squarely in the field of number theory, right? Because we are,
well, all we are doing is arithmetic with numbers, right? And comparing like left-hand side, right-hand
side, modulo prime and so on. And harmonic analysis is about functions of some special kind. And so here's
how the two fields come together, number theory and harmonic analysis. Consider the following infinite
product. And at first it looks intimidating, but if you look closely, you will see that there is a
system here. So Q is a variable. In high school, we usually denote variable by X. That's the traditional
notation. But in this subject, this particular variable is traditionally denoted by Q. Don't ask why,
nobody knows. It's just like... In every field... It's like position is usually X and then it gets
mapped to Q in Hamiltonian mechanics. I don't know why. It's weird because Q is also used in the field
which is called quantum groups, you know, quantum algebra. So for quantum. And interestingly enough,
there are many results which were obtained in arithmetic a long time ago, or a theory of modular forms,
where for some reason people chose the variable Q, they connect to results in quantum groups,
for example, in quantum algebra. And this is like, how did they know? Because when you translate them,
you don't even have to make a change of variables. Right. So it's a mystery. But anyway, somehow people
did it with Q and it caught on. And it's a traditional notation in this theory for this variable.
Okay. It's Q. It's called Q, not X. Just for the sake of explaining, or perhaps not explaining,
this function here, Q times one minus Q squared times one, blah, blah, blah, blah.
That also looks like it's dropped from the sky. So are we going to explain that or are you just going
to say that this... Yes, I will explain. But first, I want to give the answer. Okay. Sure. So first,
I have to explain what it is so that you're not intimidated by it. So first of all,
there is this Q. You just write it once and you forget about it. Then you have this guy,
this guy, this guy, and this guy, and it goes on. What do they look like? It's one minus Q squared,
right? This is Q to the first power basically, but then squared. This is one minus Q squared squared,
right? This is one minus Q to the third power squared. So each of these terms is a square of
something which looks like one minus Q, one minus Q squared, one minus Q cubed, one minus Q to the fourth.
So you can easily guess the next one will be one minus Q to the fifth squared and so on,
right? That's clear. Then in addition, you have these guys, Q to the 11 squared,
Q to the 22 squared, Q to the 33 squared. So what are these numbers? 11, 22, 33, right?
These are multiples of 11. So you have one progression where you have Q, Q squared, Q cubed,
and Q to the fourth. And every time you put a square. And then you have a second progression.
The first one is underlined with red. Second one is underlined with blue. And you got here Q to the
11, Q to the 22, Q to the 33. And each time you square it. So you can see what the next two terms
are. First, you will have one minus Q to the 44 squared, and then you have one minus Q to the five
squared. So after that, we open the brackets. Now, in principle, you could say, okay, well, how can we
possibly open the brackets? There are infinitely many terms here. So this dot, dot, dot means that
we continue ad infinitum. But the point is that the degrees grow, these powers grow. So if you are
interested in just the coefficient in front of Q or Q squared and so on, there will only be finitely
many terms which will contribute. For example, Q is already there. So Q times one in each of these factors
will give you Q. But there is no other way to get to get Q because every other term will have Q times
Q to some other power, some positive power, right? So that's how you know for sure that Q will appear
with coefficient one. What about Q squared? So for Q squared, we write actually, this is
one minus two Q plus Q squared. That's this term, right? So you see, there is minus two Q.
And this minus two Q will conspire with Q to produce minus two Q squared. This.
And there is no other way in which you can get Q squared out of this product and so on.
So what I'm trying to say is that this is well-defined. The coefficient in front of every
finite power, like Q to the fifth, Q to the sixth and so on, is well-defined, is a combination of things
that come from just finite sums and products, even though the whole thing is infinite, you see?
In other words, only finitely many terms will affect the particular power of Q when we open
the brackets. And so now we get this expression where you have each power of Q has a particular
coefficient. Like we have just calculated in front of Q, you have one. In front of Q squared,
you have minus two. And then if you continue along this path, you will see that the coefficient in
front of Q to the cube is minus one. In front of Q to the fourth is two and so on, right? So what does
this have to do with the original problem? And the amazing thing is that you recover all these numbers
as the coefficient in front of Q to the P. Can you believe this?
So, for example, in front of Q cubed, you have minus one, right?
Okay. And so this doesn't work for the non-prime numbers because there's no data.
For what? Well, for the non-prime numbers, it doesn't work.
So, in fact, this series has more information than we needed, right? Because it also has
coefficients in front of non-prime powers. And there's an interesting question of what that
corresponds to, which can be answered as well. But let's just, let's just focus.
Sure. Is that information about what it corresponds to new work that should be covered?
Some more intricate properties of these equations, but it's not really relevant. It's not really
necessary to understand the original question. So that's why we'll ignore it. We will just take
the coefficients in front of prime powers. And I claim that, in fact, they match perfectly
this numbers AP that we have in this. Let's do it. So for P equal two is minus two. And that's the
coefficient in front of Q squared, right? Yes. For P equals three is minus one. And that's the
coefficient in front of Q cube. For Q equals five, remember, we're not considering four because we
only want prime powers. So we don't care about the coefficient in front of Q to the fourth. But we do
care about the coefficient in front of Q to the fifth, right? And this coefficient is one,
which is the number AP for P equal five, which, by the way, is what we found, because we found four
solutions. But remember, AP is not the number of solutions. It's P minus the number of solutions.
So P here is five. And so P minus four is one. And that's exactly the coefficient in front of Q to the
five. In front of Q to the seven, we have minus two. And that's exactly what we have here.
And for 13, we should get four. And that's what we get. And it is a theorem. It is a mathematical
theorem. No human being can ever go through the entire sequence, right? Which is infinite,
because there are infinitely many prime numbers. This is a well-known fact. It's a well-known
theorem, right? So no human being can actually behold all these numbers at once in some sense.
However, they are all defined. And you can check for any finite element of this infinite
sequence, right? You can check that the left-hand side corresponds to the right-hand side. But imagine
how much stronger this result is. It doesn't tell you that it works for P from 2 to 13, or from 2 to,
you know, the smallest prime less than 10,000. It actually tells you that it's true for every P.
And that statement contains within an infinite sequence of statements. It's amazing if you think
about it. So one formula rules them all, right? And so we call it finding order in seeming chaos.
The coefficient, if you take the coefficient of the fifth power of Q in this infinite series,
then it will give you exactly this AP, which is P minus number of solutions for all primes, for all primes.
And so what happens is a kind of a colossal compression of information, because just one,
think about just one line of code, and I explained how this, how this, to produce this code, right? So
it's, it's, there's some regularity here. You don't need infinite amount of information. It's finite
amount of information. You just say 1 minus Q to the i, where i is equal to 1, and then repeat for i
plus 1. So you minus Q squared, minus Q squared, squared, squared, and each time square it, right? So this,
these are this, this term, this term, this term, this term, and then do the same with Q to the 11,
instead of Q. So Q to the 11, Q to the 22, Q to the 33. It's easy to program. It's extremely easy to
program it on the computer in such a way that for any prime number that is accessible, that you have
access to on your computer, on your, in your hard drive or your memory that you can actually
store it. You can, you can find in finite amount of time, the coefficient in front of Q to the P.
And guess what? It's going to be exactly the number of solutions. Well, more precisely,
it's going to be P minus number of solutions for that, for that cubic equation. That's an example of
the Lengen's program. And it's the most beautiful, it's the simplest, most beautiful example. I have to
say, I learned it from Richard Taylor. He's a great mathematician is at the Institute for Advanced
Study. He was a co-author of Andrew Wiles in their famous paper solving Fermat's last theorem. So I
learned, I learned an example from him actually, and it's in, it's in my book as well. Uh, it's,
it's in love and math in chapter seven, I think. So if you want to remember, if you want to know more,
to learn more about this, uh, kind of slow, slow, slow reading, that's where you can find it.
Um, so I also recommend that book just for people who are listening. I read it approximately a year
ago or so. And in one of the early chapters, you cover braid, braid groups and knot theory,
which is something you learn in third year in university, but it's covered in one of the early
chapters. That was my first mathematical, that was my first mathematical work. That's why I talk
about it. Right. So that was my first excitement of solving something, which nobody knew, making
discovery. Uh, we talked about whether mathematics discovered or invented. Certainly in that moment,
I felt like I discovered something, you know, about braid groups. But anyway, so what I'm trying
to say is that this just one line of code, um, kind of gives us, gives us a simple rule for solving
this infinite counting problem for all prime numbers at once. That's what I mean by finding
hidden connections. Remember I said to me, unification in mathematics is about finding hidden
connections between different fields, which seem to be far apart. Here it's between the field of number
theory and the field of harmonic analysis. All right. So now let's talk about who, what is this,
what is this product? Okay. In what sense does it reside in harmonic analysis? Okay. And so the point
is that if it, when we, um, when we talked about it first, um, we talked about it as a kind of a formal
expression, right? So just like a product Q. So Q was just a variable, but actually it turns out that
we can assign a numerical value to Q and this product will converge. So even though it is a product
of infinitely many numbers, uh, it turns out that this product actually makes sense and not in a,
not in a kind of a esoteric sense is like one plus two plus three plus four, but actually like
the rigid, precise, rigorous sense of limits that we study in calculus, the product of finitely many
terms of this from the first to the nth of this expression is actually going to have a limit as n
goes to infinity. And that therefore, but only if Q is a number between minus one and one, a real number
between minus one and one, or we could also work with a complex unit disc. You know, the complex numbers
live on a plane because they have both real and imaginary part. And every complex number has a
norm, which is the distance from this, from a geometric representation of this number as a point
on a complex plane and the point zero. So for example, number I has, has normal one, because that's
the distance from I to zero. If you take all numbers whose norm is less than one, you obtain the interior
of a disc, of a unit disc, right? And for every point in that disc, if you view it as a complex
number and substitute in this infinite expression, we will get a well-defined number. It will have a
limit. This product will have a limit, you see. So therefore we get a function on the unit disc. For
every Q, we get a specific value, which is encoded by this infinite product. So we get a function on a
unit disc and it is called a modular form. And the point is that it has very special transformation
properties under the group of symmetries of the unit disc, which is denoted PSL2Z. So instead of
explaining exactly how this group acts on the unit disc, I'm going to show you how a similar group acts
by showing you what's called the fundamental domains. So the action of a group like this,
it's actually going to be a subgroup of PSL2Z. And this is not exactly the same subgroup,
but it will do as an illustration. So here's what I'm talking about. Remember our harmonic analysis on
the circle, which we can go back just a moment, can you go back to slide 40? Okay, so this function is
defined on the complex unit disc. Yes, which is, think about this. That's, it's like this, right? So
two complex numbers. To all of complex numbers. That's right. So not just upper half. So look,
here's a complex. So here's a complex plane, which has two x's x and y, where if you have a point here,
a point with coordinates x, y, we assign to it number x plus yi. That's a complex number assigned to a point,
right? And so you have number one here, you have number i here, you have number minus one here,
you have number minus i here. And then you can draw this circle of radius one. And so your number q
is going to be some number inside this circle, you see. So that's your q. The condition is that q is
less than one, which means that x squared plus y squared is less than one. Does it make sense?
My question is, where is it going to? What's the target space? Oh, yeah. So the for every q,
for every q, which is like this, this function has a value, which is a complex number without any
restrictions. Okay, some complex, some complex number. And it's unique. It's unique. Yes, it's
unique. Absolutely. Yes. Otherwise, it's not a function, right? So when we say function, we mean
single value function, which means a rule which assigns to every q, some complex number, but every
q, not everywhere, q is constrained by the property that it is within the unit disk. The value is the
only constraint is that is unique is finite, is well defined, and it's uniquely defined. So
Now explain where SL2z comes in. So SL2z. Yes, so there is a SL2z. Before I explain this,
let's look at the simpler situation. Okay. So at the simpler example, namely, the harmonic analysis that
we discussed earlier when we talked about sounds of music, right? So we have this basic harmonics,
sine nx and cosine nx, where n is an integer. And we discussed the fact that every function on the
circle, so they are periodic functions, because if you send x plus 2pi, the value will be the same.
So they're periodic with period 2pi, right? And the point is, so the invariant under the shift x plus 2pi.
And the point is that harmonic analysis allows us to write any function on the circle,
essentially, any continuous function, let's say, as a linear combination of these guys. That's called
Fourier series. And you can think about it as decomposing the sound of a symphony, of an orchestra,
into the notes of different instruments in time. So that in this case, the x is a time,
because it plays music in time. And each note, roughly speaking, is a wave, like sine of an x or
cosine of an x. And as I said, we can arrange things in such a way that these notes are proportional to
a specific note, to a specific frequency. The frequencies of these notes are proportional to
a specific frequency with integer multiple, with rational multiples more precisely, but we can always
find the kind of a common denominator so that they will be just integer multiples.
So that's the setup of harmonic analysis. But what I want to focus our attention on is the fact that
actually there is this invariance. What's special about these functions, sine nx and cosine nx,
is that they are invariant under the shift x goes to x plus 2pi. But if so, it's also invariant under the
shift x plus 2pi times some integer, for example, 4pi, 6pi, 8pi, minus 2pi, and so on.
So you see what happens, that actually there is a group of symmetries that is lurking in the background
when you talk about these functions. This function really is defined, think about it,
this function is defined on the real line. So that's your real line, right? And so your function is
going to be a cosine function or sine function. So it's going to look something like this, right?
It's a wave like this. But now the point is that if you shift it, you see, if you shift it by this amount,
if you shift it by this amount, it will stay the same, right? So if you imagine shifting this whole
this whole curve from here to here. So this point goes to here, this point goes to here,
so it will go to itself. That's what I mean by being invariant. Right?
I think that's the best approach for this part. And then in part two, we can go to the
graduate student level.
Yeah, I do. I do. I do. I want people to understand it, because it's really basic
and beautiful stuff. So, so what I'm trying to say is that there is a shift under which the whole
thing goes to itself. And so this shift is a shift by 2pi. Let's say that I'm writing the basic
one, which corresponds to n equal 1. And then the sine 2xa, they will oscillate more frequently,
but they will still be invariant under the shift. But it's also invariant under the shift by 4pi.
It's also invariant under the shift by 4pi, which would be like twice this, twice, this and one more
time, right? So as a result, it's invariant under all of the shifts. And all of the shifts gives you an
action of the group of integers on the real line. And what I would like to focus on is what's called
the fundamental domain of the section. And the fundamental domain of the section is just this
interval. Because it's like, remember, like when we talked about arithmetic module of 5, then we
identify things which are related by multiple of 5. So the fundamental domain consists of just 0,
1, 2, 3, 4. Every other thing you can get by adding to one of those, a multiple of 5.
And likewise, now on this picture, every real number can be obtained from a number on just on
this interval, a plus a multiple of 2pi. So that's called the fundamental domain, fundamental
domain. But actually, it's not the only fundamental domain, the whole real line breaks into fundamental
domains, which are going to be from this point to this point, from this point to the next, and so on.
They all have length 2pi. And now let's go back to this. So here on the unit disk, there is another
group, which is called PSL2C, which plays the role of Z, 2pi Z, in our baby version, which is here,
this 2pi M. And the analogs of these intervals are precisely this kind of hyperbolic triangles,
both red and white. So this gives you a sense of how this group acts. It acts by hyperbolic
transformations. And this visualizes how, what it does, it exchanges different triangles. It exchanges
points in red triangles with points in other red triangles or white triangles, you see. So this gives you
rough idea of the special properties of this function that we are considering. This function,
which is obtained from our infinite series that solved for us all the counting problems for all
prime numbers, all at once. This function that we obtained from this series by evaluating it at points
in the unit disk actually has special symmetry properties with respect to the group which acts like
so, which is similar to how sine and cosine functions act with respect to the action of a much simpler
group, namely the group 2pi Z, Z being the integers, you see. So that's a rough explanation. And again,
if you want to know more, for instance, you can read about this in chapter seven of Love and Math and so
on. But that's a kind of a rough explanation of what is so special about this function.
Now the weight in this one is what is two, you said here, or is it one?
The weight, because modular weight is two, weight is two, weight is two, because roughly speaking,
because well, it's elliptic. So it's like to demand it has to do something something two dimensional is
in the background. Sure. Now, this is actually so now, this is one example, remember, is what we're
considering is just one example. There is one counting problem, there is a specific cubic equation,
right? It was y squared plus y equals x cube minus x. And we are looking for every prime number,
we get a number of solutions, then we slightly modify it by subtracting it from p. Those are
coefficients in front of prime powers of q in this infinite series. Can we generalize it? It turns out
that this has a vast generalization. In other words, you were just given an elliptic equations,
so that y cubed minus y squared equals x cubed, or whatever it was before. That's right. Okay,
so you were given an equation, then you from that asked, well, what are the number of solutions in
modulo prime or the clock arithmetic prime number? That's right. And then actually, you took a modified
form of that with some error term, but doesn't matter. That's right. Found a correspondence between that
and a modular form. That's right. Now you're wondering... A specific modular form, a specific
modular form, right? Which we could actually write out explicitly. Right. And now you're wondering,
okay, well, that was for one elliptic curve. Can I be greedy? Is there a class of elliptic curves that
this may work on? Does it work for every single type of elliptic curve? Exactly.
Every... Was this just a coincidence? Every... Is there something special here?
It is actually works for all smooth elliptic curves. So there is some kind of condition.
Non-degenerate kind of equations, okay? So there are lots of equations you can write of this nature
that we wrote, right? Infinitely many, in fact. And for all of them, there will be its own... For each
of them, there will be its own modular form, which will encode numbers of solutions for all primes,
save maybe finitely many. In this case, we lacked out actually every single prime.
For every single prime, we got matching, perfect matching with the coefficients. In general,
there will be finitely many prime numbers for which it will not work. But okay, it's not a big
deal compared to infinity of other primes for which it will work, you see. So, and that is called the
Shimura Tanyama way conjecture. And it's a beautiful story. So this is the 1950s. There were two Japanese
mathematicians, Yutaka Tanyama, and Goro Shimura, and Andre Vey, the recipient of that infamous letter
from Robert Langlands. They were actually at a conference in Japan. There was a famous Tokyo Niko
Symposium in 1955. Remember, this is after World War II. And obviously, Japanese mathematicians were
isolated from American mathematicians. This was essentially the first meeting of the mathematicians
from the two nations. And it was extremely influential. So this is a picture. The talks
were held in two cities in Tokyo and Niko. And they are on the train here going from Tokyo to Niko,
or maybe the other way around. And who do you see here? So you have, this is Andre Vey,
this is Yutaka Tanyama, who's this brilliant Japanese mathematician, committed suicide at the age of 31.
I talk about this more in Love and Math. And so if you're interested, it's a very interesting story.
This is Goro Shimura, another Japanese mathematician who actually worked most of his life at Princeton
University. And this is Jean-Pierre Sayre, a legend from Paris. You see a beautiful picture, huh?
Yeah.
And so the Shimura Tanyama way conjecture is, what is it again? Let me say it one more time.
So it's a statement that for every cubic equation, what we call the elliptic curve over finite fields,
or elliptic curve of the rationals, and then we specialize in modular prime numbers.
Every cubic equation of the kind we considered will have its partner in a different world,
in the world of modular forms. So they're going to be of weight two and also satisfy some additional
condition. They're going to be what's called a new form, which I'm not going to get into it.
It's a technical, but not very complicated condition.
Sure.
And it turns out that there's a bijection.
And it goes in both directions.
One-to-one correspondence. Isn't it amazing? One-to-one correspondence. That for every modular
form, there is its own cubic equation waiting in the wings, whose counting problem will be given by
the coefficients of this modular form at prime powers, save maybe for finitely many of those.
And conversely, for every cubic equation, there is a modular form waiting to give the solution to the
counting problem. So that's the kind of things we're talking about. It's really mind boggling.
And how did they come up with this is absolutely genius. Like now we look back after so many
years, like what, 70 years, it looks kind of, yeah, sure, it makes sense. But it absolutely did
not fall from anything. Just the fact that there were several examples known, it doesn't mean that
there should be really one-to-one correspondence, and yet there is. You see, that's how groundbreaking this
is. And to add to the kind of the glory of this result, I want to mention that Fermat's last
theorem actually follows from it. In 1986, my colleague here at UC Berkeley, Ken Ribbett,
proved that if you can show Srimmurti and Yama way conjecture, then you get Fermat's last theorem.
And Fermat's last theorem, of course, I imagine most of the viewers have heard about. It's an impossibility
of solving this equation with positive integer numbers. You see, so Ken Ribbett comes in, so that
Fermat's last theorem was proposed by Pierre Fermat on the margin of Diophantus' book on arithmetic
350 years ago. And he wrote famously on the margin that he found a beautiful proof of it,
but the margin is too small to contain it. So for the next 350 years, people try to prove it,
professionals and amateurs, only to have their hopes dashed, that people would find mistakes,
and so on. Until finally, in 1996, Ken Ribbett, my colleague here at UC Berkeley, was able to relate
it to something, to a different conjecture, which is the Srimmurti and Yama way conjecture we just
talked about. In fact, we talked about one specific example of this conjecture, but the Srimmurti and Yama way
conjecture is much vaster than that. It services every cubic equation and every modular form,
which is of way two and a new form. So finally, what remains to prove is the Srimmurti and Yama way
conjecture. And that was done by Andrew Wiles and Richard Taylor in, when was that? 1995, I believe.
And so that, in other words, Firmas Listerium follows from Srimmurti and Yama way. But Srimmurti and Yama way
is a special case of the Langlands program. So now, already, the Srimmurti and Yama way is a vast
generalization of this one example we considered, because our one examples reference specifically
a particular cubic equation and a particular modular form, which was given by that infinite product.
Srimmurti and Yama way conjecture is a vast generalization of that to arbitrary cubic equations
satisfying some conditions and modular forms. And that's just a very special case of the Langlands
program. So now, the Langlands program is a vast, you see, that's what it's about. Now,
the original Langlands program was about this type of questions in number theory and a possibility of
solving them in terms of much more easily tractable questions in harmonic analysis.
Now, I have a feeling that we are approaching kind of a nice middle point in this conversation.
I feel like we won't be able to get to the end of it today, unless we talk all day. So,
do you think it would make sense to have a second installment where I will pick up on this? We have
now a very nice kind of like we build the foundation. We see now an example of what this is about, a very
concrete example of what this is about. So, this will give us motivation to study this further and to
think about generalizations of this Langlands program, moving it away from questions in number
theory to the questions in geometry that are related to Riemann surfaces and things like that.
And that will bring us up to date to the most recent achievement of these recent papers that we
talked about. Sure. So, here's what we'll do. People who are watching, if you have any questions,
leave them in the comments below, because then this way we can pull from them to ask next time,
if you're confused at any point. And a quick question I have is, the Langlands program is usually
formulated as, if I have a question in number theory, I can more easily answer it in harmonic analysis.
Right. But I don't hear the opposite, that if there's a question in harmonic analysis,
can I throw it over to number theory? It's much more easily solved there and throw it back to
harmonic analysis. Interesting enough, such questions did emerge. Because obviously,
if you have a bijection, then initially it looked like harmonic analysis is much simpler. And so,
this is kind of an advantageous approach is to reformulate number-theoretic questions. Not all number-theoretic
questions, mind you. I want to make sure that there is no misunderstanding. I'm not saying every single
question and number theory can be formulated in these terms. No. Very specific questions,
like the questions that we discussed, right? So it's less like a bridge between two continents,
and more like a bridge between a city in one continent to a city in another one?
It's more than a city. It's more like a state, like a big state, like California,
a state of California. It's like a big state in the country. Well, if we talk about continents-
Yeah, the point of it being, it's a proper subset.
It's a proper subset, but it's a very big subset. And the question is, and one could hope that maybe
for now, we think it's a subset, but maybe eventually we'll see. In a sense, it is much more
than just a subset, because let me comment on this, because it's important. So the proper formulation of
this correspondence is not in terms of equations that we did on the side of number theory. It's in
terms of the Galois group. It's in terms of the Galois group. So Galois group is a very important
concept in mathematics. And Galois group, roughly speaking, describes symmetries of numerical systems
that you can get out of rational numbers. By rational numbers, I mean fractions. A divided by B,
like one-half or three-fifths. They form a field of its own, and we can throw in solutions of various
polynomial equations into it, like square root of two or i. As a result, we get what's called
algebraic closure, a much faster field. And one could argue, and I think this is a very good argument,
that every problem in number theory boils down to a problem about Galois group, this Galois group.
Now, if you accept that, Langland's program actually gives you something very simple,
more or less gives you an answer to most reasonable questions about Galois groups, because it describes
n-dimensional representations of the Galois group for all dimensions. What we are discussing now has
to do with two-dimensional representations that have to do with this elliptic curves. But in fact,
the conjectures cover a much vaster spectrum of questions about Galois groups. So in some sense,
it's not a big exaggeration, it's that we are actually covering a very big territory. It's not
a city, for sure. It's not even like a state. It's much more. It's like a coast. It's a coast,
it's a big half of the country, maybe. Oh, okay.
At least half of the country, let's just say. So it is really serious. It's not like a small province.
Understood, understood. Okay.
I didn't mean to diminish its importance. No, no, I'm not trying to. I'm not trying to.
By the way, it's not really my field, so I don't have a horse in this.
Okay. So because people are going to be champing at the bit thinking like,
oh, I wish that I had more to chew on when it comes to what are the recent results about,
why don't you just give a flyover? Let me give a teaser for what's coming next.
So first of all, well, that's the kind of a summary of what we talked about,
the cubic equations are connected to
modular forms. And the general correspondence is about representation of Galois group is what's
called automorphic functions, which generalize these, and these generalize these. So when I say
it's not really my field, I mean, I come into Langland's program more from the side of geometry.
So this is something that I don't necessarily work on on a daily basis. So it's kind of like more of a
hobby this area of the Langland's program for me. But now we're going to move closer to what my
field is, the field in which I have worked for the last four years.
So, and if you'd like to save time, address a graduate student audience in math or physics.
Okay. So first, there is one twist, which I haven't mentioned, which is what's called the
Langland's dual group. Because in fact, there is a group, what's called a group appearing on both
sides, but these two groups are not the same. One of them is a dual, so-called dual. And why it is so
is a big mystery, but it's one of the indications that it's something very non-trivial. These groups
are described in terms of Dinkin diagrams. So there's some beautiful, beautiful combinatorics.
There's a beautiful story underneath. And so finally, we get to the crucial point, which is that,
in fact, we talked about number theory and about how the questions in number theory can be
related to some questions in harmonic analysis, right?
But there is a separate idea in mathematics, which is called the Rosetta Stone of math,
which is due to Andre Wey. That's the guy to whom Robert Langlands wrote his initial letter in 1967.
Andre Wey, in turn, wrote a letter of his sister, Simone Wey, who was a great philosopher and a mystic
and a humanist from jail, from prison in 1940. He was jailed because he refused to serve in the army
during the war. And Andre Wey, in this letter, formulated an analogy between three different
areas of mathematics. Number theory, curves over finite fields, and Riemann surfaces.
So that's not the same kind of list as what we have here. So Langlands correspondence is from
number theory to harmonic analysis. But number theory has analogues to other fields, this and this.
And so the question arose as to whether there are analogues
of harmonic analysis for this guy and for this guy.
And did we not just do curves over finite fields?
That's right. So curves over finite fields have already occurred, but in fact, for a different
reason, and this is a bit confusing, but bear with me. The reason why what occurred here is not really
a curve over a specific finite field. But remember, we had one equation which actually made sense,
modulo every prime. So in fact, it was an equations over the integers because the coefficients were
integers. That's what enabled us to relate it to an equation over modulo prime. So in other words,
here you actually have... The truth is that what we have here is an elliptic curve
elliptic curve over the integers, or the field of rational numbers.
And if you have such a curve, you can consider, you attach to it a curve over all primes,
for all modulo all primes. You see?
All primes. But here we consider finite field with a specific, with a fixed prime.
So it's a different setup, even though the same objects appear here and here,
but they appear in a different way, in a different, they have different meanings.
So even though they appear in both, they actually kind of have different interpretation.
Okay, so there are three relationships here. There's number theory to harmonic and back,
and then there's curves over finite field to something else not defined yet,
and Riemann surfaces to something else. So we have to find, and this is a question,
what are these connections in these two other realms?
Okay, so it's a conjecture about conjectures.
That's right.
Interesting.
And so you see, the point is, actually, to be honest, this connection was kind of obvious,
because these two areas are so close to each other, that it was very easy to find an analog of
the harmonic analysis that is necessary for these guys.
There are already connections going downward, from number theory to curves over finite fields,
and then from number theory to Riemann surfaces.
These are not connections. So you see, horizontally, it's really like a correspondence,
right? Because we saw that for that cubic equation, that corresponds to that cubic equation,
that corresponds to a particular modular form, right? So that numbers of solutions of the equation
modular primes can be expressed as the coefficients of this modular form, right? So it is not just an
analogy, it's actually bona fide one-to-one correspondence. So horizontal is a correspondence,
where one thing on the left, object on the left corresponds to object on the right.
But the vertical is not a correspondence, it's an analogy. You're saying whatever happens for number
theory questions like that should also be true for similar questions for curves over finite field.
And something like that should also be true for Riemann surfaces. This is much more vague,
much more or less, much less defined. You see? Andre vague.
Why vague? Oh, vague. I got you. That's a good one. Yes. Andre vague. That's it.
So Andre V's genius was to see the analogy between these three fields, and not just to see them kind of
like as a dream, but in fact, come up with some tangible conjectures, the so-called, you know,
the vague conjectures, which is very closely related to this stuff, which is kind of Riemann hypothesis for
this middle field, which was eventually proved by various people, including Alexander Grotendijk and
Pierre Deligne. But here we're not talking about that. We're talking about now a hypothetical generalization
of this one-to-one correspondence called Langland's correspondence in the original setup
to a similar correspondence for this field and for this field. You see? That's the idea.
Yeah. And, and the point is that go from here to here is relatively easy. And it was actually clear
from the outset, but to go here is complicated. Okay. Okay. So we've lingered on slide 54 for too long.
So for the synoptical glimpse that we want to give rapidly, can you go over just for the graduate
students as a tease? Yeah. Okay. So look, Rosetta Stone is going like this analogies between these three fields,
number theory. Yes.
Here I have a nice picture of Ivaris Galois, because it's all about Galois groups, like I said,
curves over finite fields, equations like this, but for a fixed prime. And we don't care about,
and it's not just about solutions of this, but about some more concrete questions and only for a fixed
prime. And then there is a theory of Riemann surfaces and kind of geometric objects that are
associated to them. So here I want to, and perhaps that this was, this is where we'll stop. So,
because I think that otherwise it's kind of going to be a little bit overwhelming,
but I want to, I want to quote Andre Vey from that letter. Andre Vey wrote,
my work consists in deciphering and trilingual text. I remember the actual Rosetta Stone. Rosetta Stone
was a stone with three texts, texts in three different languages about the same thing. And
archaeologists were able to decipher them because they knew that these three texts reference the same
thing. So that's an apt analogy that he was talking about this trilingual text, trilingual because
of these three fields that he's discussing, number theory, curves over finite fields, and Riemann surfaces.
And of each of the three colons, I only have disparate fragments. I have some ideas about each of
the three languages, but I also know that there are great differences in meaning from one colon to another.
In the several years I have worked at it, I have found little pieces of the dictionary. And I want to
quote another place from that letter, where he talks about how the process of mathematicians,
how at first you come up with some conjectures, with some analogies, and it's all very vague at that
point. It's all like a dream. But eventually, some of it may work out and kind of solidify and
crystallize into something which is a rigorous bona fide theory. And in this passage, Andre Vey talks about
not only what is gained when you go from this dream to its realization, but also what is lost.
He says, when this happens, gone are the two theories, the two theories that you tried to,
that you saw, of which you saw some kind of nebulous analogies, but of which you have now
connected to each other. Gone their troubles and delicious reflections in one another, their furtive
caresses. Remember, he's French. They're inexplicable quarrels. Alas, we have but one theory,
whose majestic beauty can no longer excite us. Nothing is more fertile than this illicit liaisons.
Nothing gives more pleasure to the connoisseur. The pleasure comes from the illusion and the
kindling of the senses. Once the illusion disappears and knowledge is acquired, we attain indifference.
In the Gita, he's referencing Bhagavad Gita, the sacred text of Hinduism. He actually spent a lot of
time in India. He learned Sanskrit. He met personally Gandhi. He was a very deep guy. And he's referencing
Gita here. In Gita, there are some lucid verses to that effect. And then he goes, that's my favorite part,
but let's go back to algebraic functions. So I think it's a good place to take a break. And
given all the knowledge we have acquired, I think this will be a good stepping stone for us to explore
the Langlands correspondence in these two other colons of the Rosetta Stone until eventually we'll
arrive at the geometric Langlands correspondence. And some other versions, which I will also talk about,
the so-called analytic Langlands correspondence, which are the versions of the Langlands program
for human surfaces.
Wonderful. I have to get you to expand on the pleasure comes from the illusion. So that to me
sounds like a difference between Buddhism and Hinduism. Because in Buddhism, they would say that
the suffering comes from the illusion, or more specifically attachment, though still there's a heavy
emphasis on removing an illusion. And here it says the pleasure comes from it.
Yeah. Well, suffering comes from attachment, I would say, in Buddhism. That's the Buddhist idea,
from attachment. So the question is, can you have an illusion without an attachment?
I think so. I think so. An illusion is something... You know how in both of these traditions and other
Eastern traditions, there is this concept of Maya. The world is an illusion, is a play of Maya.
So in a sense, we have our own Maya in mathematics as well. So I think that I kind of see it a little
bit as a comment on that. In other words, there is a play. And this is important, I think also, by the
way, in terms of discussion about what is creativity and what is the difference between the human
consciousness and artificial intelligence, human intelligence and artificial intelligence. And so
there is a temptation, given how powerful our current models, large language models and so on,
of artificial intelligence. It's very tempting to say that they can do everything human beings can do.
And I disagree. I think that the work of the great mathematicians, such as Andre Vey, Robert Langlands,
Alexander Grothendijk, and others, shows that true discoveries in mathematics are really points of
departure from what is known. It's very hard to imagine that these discoveries can be made by simply
reshuffling and correlating and interpolating known data. It comes from somewhere else. It comes from
this inspiration, which is very hard to quantify. But all of us, mathematicians, scientists in general,
and in fact, all of us, I think, who do what we love, we all know this feeling of inspiration,
this feeling when you start flying, when you are not in control anymore, when you are propelled. It's
almost like you're possessed by something, by an idea, perhaps, by beauty, by love. And so,
to me, the story, that's what it's all about. It's about human creativity,
and how much we can do as humans, when we let ourselves to do it, and not to block ourselves.
Thank you, professor. I'm glad I WhatsApp messaged you.
Okay, well, I'm enjoying it, as you can see. It's my favorite subject, honestly.
I can talk about this all day. But I also feel that, at some point, it becomes a little bit
too much, overwhelming, and so I think that it's a good place to break. But I'm looking forward to
the continuation.
Firstly, thank you for watching, thank you for listening. There's now a website,
curtjimungle.org, and that has a mailing list. The reason being that large platforms like YouTube,
like Patreon, they can disable you, for whatever reason, whenever they like. That's just part of
the terms of service. Now, a direct mailing list ensures that I have an untrammeled communication
with you. Plus, soon I'll be releasing a one-page PDF of my top 10 toes. It's not as
Quentin Tarantino as it sounds like. Secondly, if you haven't subscribed or clicked that like button,
now is the time to do so. Why? Because each subscribe, each like, helps YouTube push this
content to more people like yourself. Plus, it helps out Kurt directly, AKA me. I also found out last
year that external links count plenty toward the algorithm, which means that whenever you share on
Twitter, say on Facebook, or even on Reddit, etc., it shows YouTube, hey, people are talking about
this content outside of YouTube, which in turn greatly aids the distribution on YouTube. Thirdly,
there's a remarkably active Discord and subreddit for Theories of Everything, where people explicate
toes, they disagree respectfully about theories, and build as a community our own toe. Links to both are
in the description. Fourthly, you should know this podcast is on iTunes, it's on Spotify,
it's on all of the audio platforms. All you have to do is type in theories of everything and you'll
find it. Personally, I gained from rewatching lectures and podcasts. I also read in the comments
that, hey, toe listeners also gain from replaying. So how about instead you re-listen on those platforms
like iTunes, Spotify, Google Podcasts, whichever podcast catcher you use. And finally, if you'd like
to support more conversations like this, more content like this, then do consider visiting
patreon.com and donating with whatever you like. There's also PayPal, there's also crypto,
there's also just joining on YouTube. Again, keep in mind, it's support from the sponsors and you
that allow me to work on toe full time. You also get early access to ad-free episodes, whether it's
audio or video. It's audio in the case of Patreon, video in the case of YouTube. For instance,
this episode that you're listening to right now was released a few days earlier. Every dollar
helps far more than you think. Either way, your viewership is generosity enough. Thank you so much.
