Richard Wolff is Professor Emeritus of Economics at the University of Massachusetts Amherst.
He has a popular YouTube channel, a string of influential books, including most recently
Understanding Capitalism, and according to the New York Times, he is America's most prominent
Marxist economist. So, Professor Wolff seemed like a great choice to help to get a grip
on how Donald Trump has reshaped capitalism and class struggle in his first 100 days of his second
term in the White House. In the second half of our conversation, we mainly focused on China,
including when and whether it will take over from the United States as the world's superpower and
how Marxists should understand its phenomenal rise. But I began by asking Richard for his
initial assessment of President Trump's first 100 days. Well, I am impressed, if that's the right
word. He has done as he had indicated he might, make a bigger splash, make a bigger impact, do more
things, mostly by executive order than presidents usually do, and he's done that. He has promised
to do very conventional things for the Republican Party, reduce the importance of the federal government,
shift from government to private. He's done that, above all, by destroying many agencies of the federal
government. He chose a novel method. Rather than disputing the budget, he simply fired large numbers
of the people who could therefore not carry out the functions. And then as a byproduct, the budget for
these agencies was simply removed. It was a bit of a trick because typically the Republicans and the
Congress deals with the activities of an agency rather than with the employment details of that activity.
The big surprise has been in economics. His economic program has been reduced from a variety of tools
levels to one overwhelming tools, and in that is the only significant departure from conventional Republican
party strategy. So you might say he has shown himself to be a Republican president on steroids, overdone,
overactive, extreme version, something like that. In economics, it has taken above all the form of an absolute
infatuation beyond anything I've ever seen with one particular tool, namely tariffs. And that is really
interesting because a tariff is a tax. It's just the name of a tax imports have to pay when they cross the border into
your country. In the early years of our society as an independent country, after we broke away from the British
empire, we did as a nation rely on import duties because we were a relatively minor colony and our economic life
was heavily dependent on export import. And so it made a certain sense to focus your revenue efforts there. To do
it now is a bizarre departure from over a century of activity. We have occasionally used tariffs, but in a
limited way, for a limited time, and with none of the exaggerated focus that we see now. And this comes at a
time when all reasonable people, and I'm afraid that that's a shrinking number of us here in the United
States, where reasonable people would have strong doubts about the efficacy, the side costs, the indirect
costs of such a policy, such a focus on that particular tool. I mean, it is a kind of
denialism, for lack of a better term. It's a denial of how the world economy has changed, because if you took that
seriously, then this is a rather bizarre attempt to reorganize a world economy that has taken
the last 75 years to arrive at this particular situation, which makes tariffs a very odd choice indeed.
And so, to wrap it up, Mr. Trump likes to refer to the regime of Mr. McKinley, a president over a century ago,
which already is a strange move, and a president who, if you ranked American presidents, wouldn't appear
on the rank because nobody remembers a word about whoever the hell he was. You know, there's a mountain
named after him. Other than that, we don't know much. But yet, Mr. McKinley made some tariffs. He made them,
by the way, not when he was a president, but when he was a congressman. And when he became a president,
he got rid of them. This detail is, of course, lost in the hoopty-doodle around the idea. But let me
tell you why it's so bizarre. For the last century, the United States has been the overwhelmingly
dominant economic power in the world. Everybody knows that. World War II eliminated, basically,
all the others. Eliminated them as capital centers, eliminated them as traders, eliminated them as
manufacturing hubs, and so forth. The United States emerged relatively unscathed. Other than Pearl
Harbor, no bomb fell here. Our economy was in the Great Depression in the 1930s. The war is what got us
out of it. And so we emerged rather strong, and the rest of the world rather weak. Now, anyone with a
sense of history would have understood this was an odd situation, unlikely to last very long. Mr. Trump
and his associates did not get that memo. They don't understand that. They act and talk, and since I know
them personally in many cases, they actually believe that the United States is in the position it was in
the latter half of the 20th century. All evidence to the contrary notwithstanding. It is extraordinary
to live through a period of such a disconnect between the employer class in this country living in a fantasy
which may perhaps, you tell me, be understandable in Great Britain. Because you lost your empire,
we are in the process of losing ours, and denial may be what one ought to expect when one sees this kind
of behavior in the case of an empire that is no longer viable.
And I know sort of as a Marxist economist, you've been encouraging people to look at the Trump agenda
as one of class war really, trying to empower bosses and the economic elites at the expense of working
people. And there was a narrative about tariffs whereby they could fit into that story because
tariffs are a flat tax, so it's a regressive taxation. And if the idea was to replace a progressive income
tax with a flat tax in terms of tariffs, that would be something that would benefit the ruling class
at the expense of the working class. I suppose, given that though, should we be surprised that the
reason Trump's been forced into a U-turn, you know, to some degree, he's dropped lots of the tariffs,
is not from working class organization, it's from economic elites, it's from the financial markets,
from the bond markets. So how do you sort of, from a Marxist perspective, interpret the fact that the
person holding back, not the person holding back, the forces holding back Donald Trump, let's say,
are principally from the elites, not the masses? Well, we have a number of reasons for that.
Our elites are split. They always have been, and they are particularly right now. Mr. Trump, contrary
to what his proponents like to say, did not receive an overwhelming mandate. Far from it. One and a half
percent was the difference between the popular vote that Kamala Harris got and the popular vote that he
got. And the elites are themselves split. That is, they are split in ways that are very traditional.
The Republicans are the gung-ho, let's-go party of the employer class.
Their job is to take the donations from the super rich and the corporations and to use them to assemble,
to fund, that's a polite word for bribe, the parts of the general public they can bring together to
support them. And in our country, that's fundamentalist Christians, people in love with
their guns, people horrified by abortions, patriots waving the flag, all of that. The job of the
Democrats is to service another group of the same elite, take their donations, just as the Republicans
do, literally from the same corporations in many, many examples, and then use that money, like their
Republican counterparts, to assemble a different coalition of the masses. This one composed generally
of educated people, of women, of minorities, particularly African American and Hispanic, and to some degree
fading over the last 50 years, the working classes, the labor unions, and so on. And so what we have
is a back and forth. It used to be very gentlemanly in all the senses of that word, including the sexist
senses. It used to be a nice friendly game. You have the presidency for a few years, then you politely give
it to us, vice versa. The next few years, ditto for the Congress and the state houses run pretty much the same way.
So we're seeing all of that, and we're seeing that the elite in the Democratic Party, who are against Mr. Trump
from the beginning, and now, and here's what you're noticing, a beginning of a portion of the elite
who are nervous that Mr. Trump doing what they want him to do is doing it too quickly, is doing it too harshly,
and threatens by the way he is doing it to undo it, to make it fail. And this, for them, is a sign of
alarm. There are many of these folks on the Republican side who are what we call establishment Republicans.
They're the kind of Republicans who funded the party in that period that I just described,
when it was all very gentlemanly. You know, people associated with names like George Bush,
or anything like that in the previous years. Those are the ones that are beginning to shift.
Their portions of the elite are beginning to shift. And yes, that's making some trouble for him,
but not yet enough trouble for him to slow down. And he keeps reassuring them. He did it this last week
by making crystal clear your good point. They want to eliminate the income tax, the only broad-based
progressive tax we still have. It has been a 100-year program of the Republican Party,
allowed by the Democrats, sometimes actually facilitated by the Democrats,
to shift the burden of taxes away from corporations and the rich onto working-class, medium-income people.
If you take a look at the graphs, that's what we do as economists, it's a century-long process of doing that,
and he's very much in the strain of that. What you're not yet seeing, and you're quite right about noticing
that, is you do not yet see mass-based, from below, working-class opposition. But there's a very particular
reason for that that shouldn't be forgotten. The last time capitalism really crashed, which is what
we're looking at happening possibly, not yet, but possibly now, but the last time it happened, which
can give us some guidance about what to expect, the American working-class went sharply to the left.
We reacted in this country to the Great Depression starting in 1929 by shifting to the left. Huge numbers
of Americans organized organized in two socialists, one communist party, and the greatest union organizing
drive in the history of the United States, the CIO. And the reason I mention it to you is not just
look at what the working class was able to achieve then. And I could make you a list. The social security
system was achieved then by those forces from below. The first minimum wage in this country's history.
The first federal jobs program on a mass basis, hiring 15 million people, happened then because of that.
The first time we had federal unemployment compensation from the government. The left achieved
extraordinarily. And the reason I'm telling you is when the war was over, 1945, and the president who
enacted all of that under pressure from below, Franklin Roosevelt, was dead, the business community,
led by the Republican Party, abetted by the Democratic Party, went to work to systematically destroy
the organizations on the left, socialist parties, communist parties, and labor unions,
so that they could never do again, to the ruling class, what they had achieved. And we live in that.
I'm born in the United States. I've lived and worked here all my life. We are only now, 70 years later,
emerging from the cocoon of that repression. We don't have even the relatively weak European versions of
socialist parties, communist parties, labor unions. All of that is weaker, underdeveloped here. We're going to
catch up. I think we'll surprise you in the months and years ahead. But that's why the opposition takes the
form you just noted. And so you mentioned there, sort of, we might be entering a new crisis of
capitalism. And you said the last time this happened was 1929, sorry, in the Great Depression,
which I presume suggests you think we're getting into a crisis which is bigger than 2008. You know,
because when people sort of look back to a financial or an economic crisis, they normally say,
oh, is a new 2008 coming? You think a new 1929 could be coming? Could you talk about that?
Yeah, well, you know, my use of the Marxian system of thinking about it and of Marx's own analysis
has now been added to by the research of the National Bureau of Economic Research, which I can
assure you is not tinged by any Marxism at all. It's a quasi-governmental entity here that keeps track
of the ups and downs of the capitalist economy, literally periodizing so we can see. And their
research shows, as all of us in the economics profession, that's what I do for a living. I'm
a professor of economics. We make use of the NBER, as we call it. And it has shown us that wherever
capitalism settles anywhere in the world over the last three or four hundred years, it has an economic
downturn every four to seven years. Now, some of them are short and shallow. Some of them are deep
and last a long time. The Great Depression, very deep, lasted 11 years, a very long one. The one in
2008 was very deep, but much shorter in duration. The one in 2020 was deeper still, but also shorter.
No one can tell in advance, certainly I don't claim to, and I don't take seriously anyone else who does,
can tell you when exactly it will hit, how deep it will be, how long it will last.
And that's very, very hard to know, even when you're in the middle of it, let alone in advance.
So I don't know exactly when, but if it's a four to seven year average, which it is, and if the last
one was 2020, which it was, and we're now in 2025, we'll do the arithmetic. It isn't that complicated.
We are due for one. And I might assure you that if you pick up the pages of the Financial Times or
the New York Times or the Wall Street Journal, they are full of articles about the recession
that some economists expect will happen this year, others next year. And you know, calling it a
recession is a predictive game and therefore doesn't have much value. You can't know whether the
recession is going to be depression category or not, or somewhere in between. But here is the single
most important reason why this one will for sure be significant and different from the others, as they
always are. The big fact this time, not the only one, you know, if we want to, we can go into it, but the
really big one, this is the first time in a century that the United States has a serious global economic
competitor. That is a new experience, one that has not yet penetrated in the minds of the people running
this country. All they see is another Soviet Union, another Cold War. In fact, many of them like to refer
to what is emerging now as a, quote, new Cold War, this one with China instead of with the Soviet Union.
But let me, as an economist, point out the Soviet Union was never remotely an economic competitor of the
United States. It wasn't that in 1917, it wasn't that in 1975, and Russia today isn't anything like that
relative to the United States either. Never has been. The GDP of the United States is beyond 25, 26 trillion
dollars. If I generously estimate the GDP of Russia today, it's four trillion dollars. That's an elephant
and a mouse, not a competitor. China is a completely different economic relation, and that is limiting
the United States, as the headlines today make clear in what Mr. Xi Jinping can and does say relative to
what the United States' agendas happen to be. That reality changes everything and will give its unique
stamp to the downturn we get this year or next. And I mean, Donald Trump clearly, I think, did
underestimate the strength of China. He thought his trade war could kind of, you know, kowtow them.
Obviously, I think, at least in the short term, it seems like China have won this confrontation.
What would a more reasonable, more rational, more thoughtful American elite or an American
government? How should they deal with the rise of China in a way which is more sensible or which
would sort of fit the ideas that you would propound? Well, let me introduce this by doing a little play,
if you will allow me, on the relationship between the United States and Britain. We were a small,
inconsequential corner of the British Empire, and we wanted to be independent for all kinds of reasons.
And we went to war, brashly. Long odds shouldn't have been the outcome it did, but there it was,
surprise to surprise, the United States was able to win the War of Independence, as we call it, back in 1776.
The British couldn't quite get it, and we had to have another war in 1812, and the British lost again.
And after that, a deal was made. And here's the deal. You can be independent, and you can take over
our role more or less, by our, I mean the British at that time, in Latin America. And we take all that
terribly seriously in this country, and we call that the Monroe Doctrine, after the name of the obscure
fellow who was president when this was written down. But the rest of the world, Europe, Asia, Africa,
that was left, of course, to the British, who were the dominant power at that time. Well,
the interesting thing about it was that the two wars taught these two British and Americans a lesson.
work it out. Make a deal. Divide the world, if you actually need to live in those hysterical terms,
megalomaniac terms. Okay, in those days, imperialism being the name of the game, it made a certain sense.
You wouldn't want to reason that way now, or if you did, you'd be overruled.
But the idea, sit down and work out a way that the United States could grow as it did phenomenally
in the rest of the 19th century and into the 20th and let Britain finish its imperial dominance for the
rest of the 19th and into the 20th. That was a way to avoid at least a war, another one, a third one,
between these two. They did avoid that. They had even worse wars, I understand, that came later,
in which they were deeply involved, but at least not with each other.
So my proposal would be do something comparable under the different conditions we now live in,
above all the condition of armament with nuclear weapons on both of these sides,
and come to terms. I think the terms will have to acknowledge that the economic powerhouse in the
world today is no longer the United States. The United States wouldn't have asked that of Britain
at the early part of the 19th century, it wouldn't have been appropriate either,
but it is appropriate now, that's one of the big differences. The American policy now is obviously,
and certainly viewed in what I'm about to say by the Chinese this way, but even by many of us here
in the United States, this is an attempt to do what George Kennan argued should be done with the Soviet
Union. Containment was the word they loved in the 40s and 50s. Ring the country with military bases,
ring it with NATO and NATO-like associations, hem it in at every turn, block it.
All of that's being redone. The imagination of our leaders is, I'll be as polite as I know how,
limited, and so they can think in repetition, and they're trying to do it. It's not working very well,
because the relative size of Western Europe, America on the one hand, and the little Soviet Union on the
other, was ridiculous as a confrontation. You know, it makes exactly as much sense, if you allow me,
as Russia and Ukraine today, as if we didn't know that the imbalance between these two, even with massive
armament and funding from the West, was a conflict between very unequal combatants. We have now a serious
problem with China. Either we sit down, or we continue this very aggressive approach to containment,
which is and is showing up in the rest of the world as ridiculous. You know, it's no longer offensive,
it always was that, but it's becoming ridiculous, because the numbers are so crazy in terms of who's
fighting whom, that even for people whose loyalties are all on one extreme or another, and I'm, I mean,
I'm really not that. My Marxism makes me very skeptical about a whole lot of things here on both
side, but I'm not crazy, and I'm not badly trained. I'm a product, by the way, of the elite education
system here in the United States. Otherwise, you wouldn't have been, you wouldn't have found your
way to me anyway. I mean, that's how that, how it works in this country. I don't know how it works in
yours, but that's certainly how it works in ours. And I know when I see ridiculous, you know, what I'm
looking at, and it's crystal clear. As you yourself said at the beginning, it hasn't worked out real
well, this containment. Mr. Trump talked about it in his first presidency, and Mr. Biden continued
in his presidency. People don't realize that, but many of the things Trump did in his presidency,
Biden continued or made worse. You know, I'll give you an example. Right now in the world,
the greatest achievement in the electric car business is a Chinese company called the BYD
Corporation. Westerners mostly haven't even heard of it, which is true for much of what China has
achieved. But they have the best quality electric cars and trucks at the lowest price. I mean, they
have won the competition, which has been going on for at least 10, 15 years, to build an effective electric
automobile to replace the fossil fuel burning automobile car and truck. Okay, there they are.
Mr. Trump hit them with a 27.5% tariff. Mr. Biden raised the tariff on the BYD company's trucks to 100%.
So if you want to buy a BYD truck here in the United States that costs, say, $30,000,
$30,000, you would have to send to China $30,000 to get the car shipped. But before you could pick up the
car, if you're a company or an individual, you'd have to pay Uncle Sam another $30,000, making the cost to
you $60,000, which you will not do. You will instead buy a Tesla or, well, no more Tesla. Mr. Musk has become
so successful that nobody buys. Tesla is a commodity that is only sold. It is not bought anymore. We all
laugh because Mr. Musk is an object of mirth in this society when he isn't an object of much less pleasant
emotive expressions. So look, there's Mr. Biden. He did it worse. Mr. Trump has left it. We have no BYD cars
on the road here in this country. You have them in Europe. We don't have them here at all. You never,
ever see it. And the reality is this kind of behavior, this is self-destructive. Any economic,
any person trained in economics, I really mean anyone, understands that if everyone else in the world,
every competitor of the United States can purchase as an input a cheaper, better vehicle than any American
can afford to get, it's only a matter of time and not a long time before that shows up in the inability
of American products, having had to pay too much for their inputs, can't compete with those who have access
to the lower priced BYD, better quality vehicle. I mean, this may pander to your voter base.
It may please short-sighted executives, but as an economic strategy, if I were sitting in Beijing
with those people, I'd be laughing myself all the way to the very large bank.
Yeah. I mean, I suppose the way I think about Trump and China and America is that everyone,
I suppose, just looking at the maths of it, it was almost inevitable that China would overtake the
United States as the global hegemon at some point in the 21st century. But Donald Trump has just
accelerated that process by about 20 years by the manner in which he carried out his trade policy.
And which I suppose leads me to another question for you, which is what you think a world with China
as hegemon would look like? Would it be more attractive than the world that we've had for,
I suppose, at least since the Second World War, if America is the hegemon? Or could it be worse?
Could it be darker? How would you see a Chinese-led world?
Well, as I hope I suggested to you earlier, my facility with predicting the future
is close to zero. So I don't know quite what to do with your question. The China of today is,
from everything I can tell, radically different from the China, say, in the first decade or two
after the revolution, after 1949. When I was a master's student in economics, I wrote a master's
dissertation, which was at Stanford University in California. That was the custom in the economics
department there. Even if you wanted a master's degree, you had to write a master's dissertation,
the way you normally do with a PhD or doctorate program. And I chose to write it back then on the
Chinese economic program of building communes, which is something that Mao leaders tried to do
in the decade immediately after the revolution, the 1950s into the 60s.
Okay, that gave me the opportunity to do a lot of research. Stanford Library, which is one of the
better libraries in the country. It's very good on the materials about China. You know, there's a big
Chinese community in the west coast of this country, etc., etc. So I know how radically different the
Chinese society is today in every way, ideologically, politically, culturally. I mean, it's
it's a radically different society. It's urban in a way that it was not then. It's industrial in a way
it was not then. It's involved in global economic realities in a way it was not then, and on and on and on.
So I have no idea. I imagine that the decline of the United States is going to be,
is already a tumultuous experience for the world, including for China. They will have to make all
kinds of adjustments. That's already happening. We could already see, like we can here in the United
States, the tariff, which has just begun to have its impact, is already showing what that impact will be.
You know, tourists are not coming here the way they did every other summer of my life. Tourists of
America, my friends, are not going to Europe in the numbers that they did. Not even close. And you know,
we're just, we're still in April here. Normally it doesn't get going until another month or two.
And the Canadians just had an election in which they voted anti-Trump. That's what the election
in Canada showed us. So we're beginning to see enormous changes. Here's my hope, which is all it
is. It's not a foretelling of anything. My hope is that the Chinese will react to three things and
thereby be different from what we've had in the past. Number one, and most important, the Chinese
know, as the Americans could have and should have, but didn't. The Chinese know what it means to see,
to enjoy the ride up in the formation of an empire, but also the ride down. That China has had it up, and
China has had it down. When Mao talked about, or now when Xi Jinping talks about 100 years of humiliation
or equivalent statements like that, you know that that's what they're talking about. They're talking
about what happened to China in the 18th and 19th and 20th centuries when they became de facto another
colonial area, even if they kept their independence through most of it. So they have an understanding.
Americans don't. I'm telling you, as someone you can tell from my white hair, I've been around a while.
I was born in Youngstown, Ohio, right in the middle of the United States, and lived and worked here
all my life. This is a society that is at the beginning of a recognition that the empire is over,
that the expansion is over, that decline is on the agenda, and the question is how you manage that.
You don't have to run away in terror, but you have to manage it, otherwise it'll manage you,
etc., etc. We're beginning, and there's lots of opposition. We just went through a presidential
election in which you did not hear, neither from Mr. Trump, nor from Mr. Biden, nor from Kamala Harris,
one word about a declining empire. It was so taboo, you know, it would have been as shocking as if any of
them had discussed their intimate sex life or something like that. Everyone would have been
shaken with the horror of it, or who knows, in this country, maybe not. But anyway, you know what I'm
trying to suggest. So I do think that the Chinese have a leg up. They may understand that in the short
run, the ride is up. But in the long run, it is followed by a ride down. And you really don't want
to do that. And maybe the way to avoid that is to act while you still can, and you're not yet so far down
that you've lost the capability. You know, it's a little bit like handling an addiction. It's a
little bit like handling all the rules, medical care and everything else, where it's wiser to act sooner
than to wait when you know kind of what's coming. We do that, all of us, with our age, right? We understand
things are possible when we're 20 that may be not a good idea when you're 70, you know, etc., etc.
And then there's the Marxism. However unique the Marxism is in China,
however unique what they mean when they refer to their society as socialism with Chinese characteristics,
there is a commitment somewhere in there to those values that at least many, not all, but many Marxists
have taken seriously. Notions of equality, notions of freedom of association of all kinds, free speech,
and all the rest of that. Those are not values that are uniquely held by bourgeois people. They have them,
I get that. I know that the French Revolution, which ushered in capitalism, had on its banners, you know,
liberté, égalité, fraternité, and that the American Revolution added democracy. I'm excited by those values.
I take them seriously. They were what brought me to be interested in Marxism. I would like to think,
that's all it is. I would like to think that those are active over there in China also, and might be
a contributor to constructing a different next step than simply replacing the hegemony of the United
States with that of China the way the US did with that of Great Britain and so on. But is there a
guarantee? Absolutely not. Might they end up being the hegemon? Sure. I am again though, let me say one
more thing. One of the things that strikes us here in the United States, and by the way I am not,
I wouldn't mind being unique, would probably flatter my ego, but I am not unique, and what you're hearing
from me is not something that, you know, three people believe. There is a lot of us. The left in
America is very strong. It's very badly organized. Or to be more honest, it's not organized. That's its
problem. One of its fundamental problems is that legacy that I mentioned before coming out of the
previous phase when the left was really destroyed, even relative to Great Britain, destroyed in what
it was and what it could mean. I remember, for example, one of my mentors who taught me my economics
was actually a professor at Cambridge University named Morris Dobb, D-O-B-B. I don't know if you've
encountered him, but one of the great economists in Britain of the 20th century. And we read his work
here in the United States with enormous, you know, I learned more from him than almost anybody I can
think of. He was a magnificent teacher, good writer, and all of the rest of it. And we have
in that inheritance, I think we have what I could say is a kind of awareness that it's possible that
those values of the bourgeois revolution might best be understood as being what we want to hold on to,
but to ask ourselves the basic question which we think, I think, Marx asked himself.
Why did those magnificent objectives not get realized? When Marx is writing in the middle of
the 19th century, he's writing in a London that is described much better by Charles Dickens.
They didn't have liberty, equality, fraternity. Those were empty notions at that time.
Marxism, the way I get it, is the attempt to ask and answer the question, what is it about the
capitalism that was successfully brought in to replace feudalism? You got the capitalism,
but you didn't get the liberty, equality, fraternity, and democracy that the advocates of the
capitalism promised would come along with it. It didn't. Something more and different has to happen.
My hope is that that idea has a place somewhere in the emerging young people of China. And I don't
mind telling you that one of the audiences I now have, which I never imagined I would, and not through
any effort I made, is in China. I suppose, by the way, am I allowed to keep you for another question,
or do you need to get off? I know we've had you a bit longer than we said. Yeah.
Go ahead.
So I suppose some people might doubt that that would be the case. I mean, if you look at the rise of
China, you might say, here we've got a social contract. And I'm not an expert on China. I shouldn't
pretend to be one. But it seems to me that you've got a social contract where people are saying,
this government is making us rich. It's giving us economic development. If we don't get to have
freedom of speech in the same way that they have in the United States or Britain, that's a sacrifice
we're willing to make because we can see that this government is performing. And I suppose I'd like
you to speak to that. But then also, I wanted to ask you, I suppose, generally, how as a Marxist
economist, the rise of China, you know, potentially reinforces or challenges your views? Because I was
thinking about this earlier, if you'd sort of told Karl Marx, right back in the 1800s, that in the 21st century,
the world hegemon was going to be led by a communist party, I'm sure he'd be completely delighted.
But then you look at the details and sort of how China transitioned from a relatively poor country to
a relatively rich country was via market reforms by opening up to something which many people would
describe as basically capitalism. So what is, I suppose, the Marxist perspective on China and China's
rise that you would endorse? Well, you know, there are actually half a dozen questions you've just
put in there. Let me pick one, you know, the provocative of the person being interviewed.
Here's how I think, well, why beat around the boy? This is how one person, and by the way,
I only accept the label Marxist to be somewhat of a naughty boy here in the United States. In other words,
I want freely to acknowledge that reading Marx, which I have done, and teaching Marx in American
universities, which I have done all my life, has had an enormous impact on my way of thinking about
the world. And if you think I have something interesting to say, I'm kind of eager that you
be aware that it isn't so much me, it is the apparatus I use to think with. Have I been influenced
by Adam Smith and David Ricardo? You bet. Have I been influenced by the tradition of bourgeois economics?
Yes. I had to learn it, I had to take all my exams in it, and I've had to teach it. So I have no choice,
and I've learned a lot from it. I don't mean to suggest I was under pressure. I appreciate what I
learned. And since it includes Marx, and since so many of my colleagues, to their loss, never did that
work because it was so pejoratized in the American university. And let me remind you again, I'm a
graduate of Harvard, Stanford, and Yale. I'm like a poster boy for the elite education here in this country.
They did their level best to make me one of them. It didn't work, but they sure tried hard enough.
And they never asked me to read one word of Karl Marx's capital. Not at Harvard, not at Yale,
and not at Stanford, right? That's a crappy education, which is what I got here, you know. And if it was
bad there, you can imagine how far worse it could have gotten in lots of other places.
As a particularly unusual, because I'm interested in Marxism, I take the name Marxist, but it's sort of
to play a game with my audience here in the United States. Having said that, here's what I think is
happening. I think you're quite right. I think that the mass of the Chinese, having lived in levels of
poverty and immiseration, that I think you and me probably can't imagine living in day to day for
centuries, that when finally a revolution came, like the one led by those obscure fellows who ran away from
Chiang Kai-shek into the mountains of China in Yunnan. When they said they were going to build a new society,
my guess is your average Chinese peasant looked at that and said, yeah, sure, you're going to do that.
And so, long story short, the first generation, the first two generations, maybe even the first three
generations are skeptical. They look at all of this and they say, let me see what happens.
All right, then I'm an economist. Over the last 30 years, the real wages in China have quadrupled,
have quadrupled. The real wage in the United States is stagnant. If it's gone up at all, it's gone up 10,
15 percent. And then four times versus 10 or 15 percent, there's no contest here. That is going to
radically alter everything about the lives of those people. And I know that's the case because I've
seen the before and after pictures of major cities in China. I've seen it now, you know, with the
internet, we see all these things. I've talked to enough Chinese scholars visiting us here in the
United States. We have that and that's important. And I've had students from China in my, I still teach
at the university here. So I teach them and they talk to me the way students do. So I know how much
they've changed. Here's my hope. They are no longer the poor who have gotten a break. They are no longer
the ones who take you back to the village to show you the miserable situation from which they ran away.
That's over. That's done. That's over. This is a new generation which assumes all of those things,
which expects them, which has its own desires, good and bad. But I don't think it will accept the limits.
It will not make that deal you described. It wants and doesn't understand why it shouldn't get
freedom of expression, freedom to inquire, a range of varieties of opinion, of cultural forms, of
political idea, all of that. I can tell you that there are many Chinese students who come to me
during the years that they are here in the United States. They come from the People's Republic and they
have every intention of going back and they do go back. But they are very interested in the Marxian
economics when I teach that. They take the courses. They're full of questions. They have the naivete of
young people to tell me with big eyes how different this is, what they're hearing, from what they got in
school back at home. They don't mean it facetiously. They are dealing with the differences.
I don't come from their society. My Marxism is different. When I teach Marxism, I tell people
in a very short historical time, 150 years, these ideas have spread to every country on the planet.
To imagine that there's only one Marxism is ridiculous. Each of those countries has its own
history, geography, climate, economics. They're going to interpret Marx and Marxist writings in their own
ways for their own purposes. It's all over the place. It's a tradition that is immense and broad,
a little bit like saying, well, somebody's a Christian. Okay, it gives you a little idea,
but there's a lot of variation there among the different Christians or Islamists. You know what
I mean. Marxism is a rich and diverse tradition. There's room in it for all kinds of perspectives.
It has to be. And I think the Chinese, here's my hope in a nutshell. Maybe they really mean the
multi-nationalism they espouse. Maybe one of the reasons they are defeating the United States now
economically is because they took the time and the trouble and the expense of building the bricks,
whereas the United States is watching its alliances dissolve in full view of everybody.
They have built it up. Look, it's very clear. I don't know how this is viewed from where you are,
but it's very clear to us here in the United States that, by the way, this is agreed to by Trump,
what I'm about to say, that the misunderstanding in Ukraine was to not understand that Russia,
as part of the bricks could turn to India and China to offset whatever Western Europe could do to Russia.
That's what happened. That miscalculation lost the war there. And people here are very clear,
very clear on that.
So in turn, behind these words and intel should not powiedz,
that we inevitably make it a way to bear the Lineener.
And we are trying to as if såsomuri and noikal on war been in it.
So they are not going to get into place over all ages.
And this year, that we are trying to actually translate a lot of language and the令StillToll loises
that we bring in with servers that wanna take off a reason even though tengah
and they leave the auR their own last vin in Thursday
And of course, third, if you already visible a million.
And another, how do the matter and other people depend on the situation
again, have someunes, let's collect some trouble,
