Welcome everyone to another Voices with Verveke. I'm here with somebody you probably all recognize
quite readily, Christopher Massipietro, beloved friend, co-author, executive director of the
Verveke Foundation. Chris and I are intimately working together in many important projects from
the very philosophical to the very practical. And of course, beyond all of that, before it,
beyond it, beneath it, he is a dear and wonderful friend. And he will bring his lyrical touch of
clarity and elucidation, no doubt, to bear on this conversation. The other person you might know of,
and that's Andrew Sweeney. And Andrew is somebody that I have been talking to and Chris and I have
been talking to for quite some time on his channel. And I'm really happy to have him here so that many
of my students can more readily become aware of his work and his viewpoint. Most recently, you may have
seen, Chris and I were on Andrew's channel and we were talking about the Philosophical Silk Road.
That video has been very well received and quite well discussed with constructive criticism,
excellent, insightful and original connections, really recommended reflections. So thank you very
much, all of you who have done that. All of this is helping me and Chris as we try to slowly craft and
cultivate the logistics and the specific schematic architecture of the Philosophical Silk Road. And of
course, my final thanks would go to Andrew for facilitating that wonderful conversation.
And I'm now going to turn things over to Andrew after Chris says a brief hello. And then Chris will say
hi. And then Andrew will start by introducing himself.
Hello. Thank you for this. Thanks for having me on, John. And thank you, Andrew. You kind of got the ball
rolling on all of this. This topic is really fun. It's obviously it's a gesture ahead in so many ways,
but it's also in progress. It's also present. So yeah, I'm just having, I love conversations with the
two of you guys together. Obviously each of you, but the two of you guys together, I like the
conversations that we have, the three of us. I've liked them a lot and we've been doing them for a
while and we have a really natural rhythm. So there's this good chemistry to this group. I really like it.
So I'm always happy to be here with you guys. Thank you. Yeah. Hello. So are you, Andrew?
So thank you. Thank you, John and Chris, for inviting me to your channel. And I,
you're both my favorite interlocutors, you know, on the internet. And I've learned so much from,
from, you know, both of you more explicitly, John, but I often feel that you guys are sort of a team
that you have a, you have a twin soul or something. So this is the reason why I like to invite you guys
together. Of course, it'd be just as pleasurable to talk to you individually. So, so I am, you know,
an expat Canadian living in, in France. I'm in Toulouse at the moment, big city. And I guess I sort of
started blogging, you know, a few years ago and came across John's Meaning Crisis series and dove
quite deep into it and wrote a lot of, you know, blog pieces on that. Because I thought that John
had a wide sort of, you know, spectrum of interests that are similar to mine, although my interests are
less in the scientific realm and more perhaps in the spiritual and religious realm. I started in my
20s. I went through a kind of a existential crisis and began doing a lot of Zen, Zen sitting, sitting
meditation. Because it was the only thing I could, I could think of to sort of rescue my, like my
shattered, broken mind and meaning crisis. And, and then I, you know, and then I gravitated towards
tantric Buddhism. So I guess, and also I was a musician for many years. So I think those are the three
things that are my passion. I'm also a teacher. The three things are my passion. I've always sort of
been, you know, Zen, Tantra and music. Those are the three things I love. And at the moment, I'm running
a media platform called Parallax with my friend, Tom Ammark, where we're doing courses, we do a lot of
podcasts. And I, and I'm just, I'm talking to a lot of people. That seems to be a thing these days.
I don't know how it happened. So just what, what, what I wanted this to be a continuation of our last
conversation about the Silk Road, because I'm very inspired by that idea. I'm inspired by that idea
on different levels, on an imaginative level, because I've always wanted to, you know, I've always wanted
to find, let's say a home, which was not, you know, some sort of monolithic place or ideology or, but a home
that was, was, you know, kind of a dynamic spectrum of, of ideas and practices and, and, and religious
axioms, you know. And I was very attracted to, to the East for a long time. And, but I also know that
the Silk Road goes all the way, you know, westward as well. So, so maybe we can start on that note,
start talking about this, this whole East West, you know, road, you know, this, this magical road,
because it's, because it's, it's a Silk Road.
Yeah, the intent is that the Silk Road, as we mentioned last time, is something of an abstraction
from the historical reality. The historical reality, like most historical realities, is a
tremendously mixed, complex thing with some light and some shadow in it. There's, there's, you know,
there's bloodshed, there's warfare, there's commerce, but there also seemed to have been,
and this was Thomas Plant's proposal in the book, um, that really wakened me to this proposal.
He makes the proposal the first time in his book, uh, that it was also a place in which a,
like a lingua philosophica, uh, patterned on the idea of a lingua franca, a shared language,
right? A lingua philosophica, uh, that allowed the East and West to enter into not just the exchange
of words as in commerce or a transactional discussion, but to enter into what Chris and
I have been calling for quite some time dialogos, or we sometimes say dialogos. I originally emphasized
the pronunciation dialogos because I wanted it to sound different than dialogue. So now I skip back
and forth between them. Um, but the point is that this is a mutually transformative kind of encounter.
It's a discursive encounter, but it's not just a discursive encounter. It transforms people in
multiple levels and ways of knowing. Um, and then the idea was that the philosophical silk road, uh,
is an attempt to bring back, uh, a lingua philosophica in order to afford that kind of
mutually transformative dialogos so that people could return and recover their religious homes,
leave and travel to other religious homes, uh, move along the road, uh, in various ways, um,
and as a way of really orienting, uh, receptively and powerfully, uh, to the advent of the sacred that
I believe is taking place right now. And many people do, um, uh, in response to the meeting crisis.
And one thing I wanted to keep from, I'm just giving a sort of a overarching framing to get us going again.
One other thing I really want to keep on the front was something that Chris said that I thought was
central and brilliant, that the philosophical silk road represents a distinct alternative to,
obviously there's some continuity, but alternative to the religion that's not a religion. It is not
a top-down engineering project. It is a bottom-up organic, uh, project in which a form of life
in the very deep sense is, uh, uh, emerging as a way of trying to properly, um, afford the advent of
the sacred. And, and for me, that's, uh, the crucial thing right now. I've just completed
a course on Ultimate Reality, God, and Beyond. And, uh, the last book we did was Bracken's book on the
Divine Matrix, and he does that. He traces it through. Um, he starts, does Western, he starts
with Aristotle, ends, um, in the Kyoto school. And, um, uh, he makes an argument, uh, for something like,
uh, a Whiteheadian Christianity. But I say that a more consistent reading of the very text in his
argument is he ends up with something like, I think, which Nishida does, which is a kind of
Zen Neoplatonism, which we talked about last time. Where Zen Neoplatonism is not, not, not,
not the advent of the sacred. It is that which will hopefully properly proportion our perspective
taking and our participatory identification so that we can individually and collectively,
in a mutually transformative way, recognize, recognize the sacred in the new way in which
it is trying to articulate its own logos. So those are the things that I really wanted to bring back
to the center of the discussion. And I thought one of the things that we could do this time,
because you're the guest, Andrew, and because I've been thinking about this and teaching on it recently,
is maybe pivot for a bit away from Christianity and pivot more towards Zen, Buddhism, Tantra,
and along the way, Neoplatonism because of a book I'm currently reading, uh, by somebody I've currently
met, Gregory Shaw. I met him at the, at Harvard for the conference on Platonism as a living tradition.
And he has a new book out called Hellenic Tantra, uh, or, uh, in which he is explicitly arguing for
this kind of deep dialogos between Tantra and Neoplatonism. Um, and of course, many people have
already been doing that between Zen and Neoplatonism and that, that is increasing esteem. So I thought
that's where we could go and we could play around in that. Of course, we will inevitably come back,
uh, to Christianity because it is the formative mother religion of the West. Um, but I thought we
could pivot that way. And that way, uh, you could be more properly as guest center stage for a while.
Sure. Um, even though one of my concerns recently is, is, is kind of like trying to articulate like a,
a tantric Christianity or an esoteric Christianity, which is, is close to Buddhist Tantra. I mean,
I'm, I, I, in many ways, um, I'm sorry, you're, you're pushing me in the, I'm, it's like trying
to say pink elephant and, and you can't stop thinking about it. Don't talk about the pink elephant.
It's kind of like, don't talk about Christianity, but, um, uh, so, so yeah, so I'm, I'm curious what you
mean about the sake advent of the sacred and that word advent. Cause I find that to be a very beautiful
word. And then you surprised me by saying Neoplatonism is not about the advent. Uh, it sounds
to me that, that it's, it's like, um, the, what you're proposing is a kind of, uh, uh, you know,
like, um, like almost a sutured base before one could enter Tantra or something like that.
Like we need to discuss, um, and I'm, I'm mixing all kinds of different traditions and ideas here
when I'm using this language, just because it's the language that I'm most familiar with. But, um,
but, but I, I associate Tantra very close, very closely with the imaginal. Um, and, and it seems to
me that Zen and Neoplatonism aren't as much in the imaginal, uh, as they're, they're more in the
philosophical, but, but I may be totally wrong. Thank you for watching this YouTube and podcast
series is by the Verveke Foundation, which in addition to supporting my work also offers courses,
practices, workshops, and other projects dedicated to responding to the meaning crisis. If you would
like to support this work, please consider joining our Patreon. You can find the link in the show notes.
So, um, I'll say something and then I'll be quiet because I'd like to make space for Chris. Um, um,
I think there's important ways in which, uh, Neoplatonism post Iamblichus is, uh, you know,
centrally imaginal. And this is the advent with Iamblichus, which Gregory Shaw does a lot of his
scholarship on of what's called theurgia. Theurgia is the imaginal spiritual practices
of Neoplatonism. And, uh, theurgia is going through a academic revival right now.
And there's growing recognition, for example, of how much theurgia comes through Proclus into
Dionysus, the Areopagite, and how it goes into liturgy. And we don't recognize the theurgia
because we've been practicing it in liturgy. And we, oh, we, oh, where did that actually come from?
Did that just drop from the sky? Liturgy isn't given to us in the Bible. Well, where did it come from?
And, and so that's an important question. And so there's, uh, the, the imaginal. In Zen,
it's a different thing. Um, uh, in Zen, there's something analogous to the imaginal, which is the
Koanik, which we've talked before about. Um, and I want to be very careful. I was, I was,
wasn't saying that Neoplatonism isn't the, uh, I was saying Zen Neoplatonism. I said,
I think Zen Neoplatonism is the attempt to deliberately afford something with proper
and anagogic opponent processing in which Neoplatonism tends to emphasize the tracing
out of intelligibility to what Nishida would call the basho, the ultimate sort of grammar,
uh, uh, uh, uh, of intelligibility, um, the place in which sense-making occurs. And that's what
Neoplatonism is doing. Whereas Zen is more about the Koanik, right? Uh, uh, uh, like questioning
to the bottoming of experience till you get to no thingness. And, and so, um, I think the discussion
between the experience, experience isn't even quite the right word, the transjective realization
of no thingness and the transjective understanding of the ground of intelligibility are what need to,
they have, they're different. They're, one is cataphatic, a lot of speaking that gets you into
apophatic. And then in Zen, there's this, there's centering on the apophatic, which then comes into,
uh, the attempt to do cataphatic processes, uh, to recover people into the apophatic. So they have
this complimentary relationship, but the point I want to make, and then I'll shut up, I'm talking
too much, is that configuration is meant to be a self-correcting, self-transcending set of reflections
and practices and ways of egress into the west and the east. And what is Metaxu? What is between the
east and the west? Not because it is the destination, but because it is a way of orienting us so that
what, what, what has to of its very nature be born from itself can be properly apprehended and
appreciated by us. Um, and that's why I use the word advent too. It's like the advent of Christ in
the Bible. Um, and John the Baptist is not the Messiah. He is announcing the advent and he is
pronouncing the need for repentance, for a metanoia, for a reorientation. So people can be properly
prepared and receptive for what is coming. And that is how I think of the philosophical Silk Road.
Yeah. I was thinking you're, you're sort of saying clearing the ground. So, so yeah.
The way. Yeah. Yep. Yep. And now I invite, I want to invite Chris explicitly into, uh, the conversation.
Well, I think the thing that maybe the thing that's difficult to understand is the distinction you're
making between content and form. I think what you're talking about is that there's something formal
about the project of the Silk Road, that what actually is, what you're actually talking about
doing is you're setting up a series of conditions and the conditions are dialogical conditions, but
you're setting a stage. You're not presuming to know what's going to take place on the stage.
Mm-hmm. You're not actually presuming to know what kind of story will evolve on the stage,
what kind of drama will take place. But what you're trying to do is you're trying to set
the stage. Yes. To allow for something to take place on it, which is a pretty critical distinction,
right? It's that like, you know. Chris, could I do one thing? Because people are going to.
Could I play on the word stage, meaning not only the stage, but like a stage of development too. And then
I think what you're saying is even more resonant. Yeah. Yeah. Go, go for it. No, no. That's all I wanted to say.
Oh, is that it? Yeah. Okay. Yeah. I mean, because what I hear you trying to do, and it's a big
difference between talking about trying to do something forcibly syncretic. I'm going to take
these things and I'm going to make something out of them. I'm going to put them together in a pastiche.
I'm going to collage things together and I'm going to make something new in a Frankensteinian fashion.
That's going to be, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know. But I can hear that being heard,
right? I can hear it being heard. But that's not what you're talking about, right? What you're
talking about is, no, I'm going to set a stage. I'm going to put a bunch of different people.
I'm going to give them voice. I'm going to put a bunch of instruments on the stage. I'm going to put
a bunch of set decorations on the stage. I'm going to put a whole bunch of things together that seem
to have something to say to one another, that have complementary or synchronous histories and origins
and are multivocal, but have a certain assonance in their vocality that suggests to me that they
might be able to hear and listen and tune into one another like instruments on a stage in a jazz
concert. And I'm going to listen for how they play with one another, because in their playing with one
another, maybe they can recall a memory of shared origin. That might not be obvious at first blush.
But all I'm going to do is I'm going to set the stage, set the stage for them to play together.
And their playing together is not something I'm doing. All I'm trying to do is allow it to happen.
And that's a big difference. That's a big difference from trying to take a bunch of things
and stir them together in a cauldron. And it's not a distinction that's readily available to the
imagination because we think of these syncretisms as either completely historically accidental or
the product of some kind of design. And you're not really talking about either one of them, are you?
No. And by the way, let's put a pin in this. I want to keep that phrase going forward. I mean,
even beyond this conversation, I think setting the stage and all the work I've been doing on
orientation, about standpoint and stance and setting the stage, I think that's just beautiful.
The way I think of it that is completely in alignment with your beautiful metaphor, analogy,
perhaps, is Alicia Raro's notion of setting constraints, selective constraints and enabling
constraints and opponent processing of constraints so that a self-organizing process can take shape
and take form and evolve. And that is exactly what I wish to be trying to do with the philosophical
Silk Road, which is different from the engineer coming in and assembling some kind of machine out
of pre-existing pieces. So that contrast is very, very different.
Yeah. Maybe I could. Yeah, I just think. Sorry, go ahead, Chris.
No, Andrew, go ahead. Oh, I would just, I was,
because since Sean asked me to speak a bit about Buddhism, I was thinking about the analogy to what
you're saying in the Buddhist path. And I was thinking about how, you know, one of the biggest
misunderstandings of Buddhism is that it's about emptiness. Emptiness is the clearing the ground part
that you're talking about. But in Tantric Buddhism, we talk about emptiness and luminosity
and the non-duality of those things. So the expressiveness, the colorfulness, the form,
you know, is not negated. It's not. So again, so I'm thinking as you're speaking about this apophatic
nothingness, no thingness that dissolves, and then something arises, you know, like, and in Zen,
what they do is they say the mountain is not a mountain, then it's a mountain again,
you know. And in Tantric Buddhism, what they do is they say it's Vajrayogini, or it's this wild,
you know, goddess with skulls, you know, around her neck and a bowl of nectar and a butcher's knife.
So it's very interesting, that whole thing. So the idea of stage and the theatricalness of,
and the expressiveness of life and the beauty of everything and its expressiveness is very much,
I don't think, not negated in Tantric Buddhism. Maybe that comes along with what you're saying
about the stage and all the world being a stage and this whole theatrical thing, which also,
and then that made me think of Nietzsche, who said that he wanted really to sing philosophy. He wanted to
break out of, you know, he wrote his first book, which was very propositional and argued and well
reasoned. And then the rest of his career, he wanted to sing the whole thing into existence. So
those are some of the things that I was thinking about as you were speaking.
I think the point about that nothingness is not emptiness as privation, but a dynamic, you know,
fully fractal flow of interpenetrating reality, like pure relationality, an abandonment of the idea of
substantial things, entities as the grounding of reality. But, you know, the impermanent
interconnectedness of all things is neither a complete privation, right? You know this,
Andrew, this is a central thing. It's neither a nihilism and, or is it essentialism? It's saying,
no, no, reality is a flow in a profound way. And I think, especially given a person whose work I'm
trying to make monumentally important, James Filler's work on Neoplatonism and Heidegger and
pure relationality, he argues that this is exactly what comes out of the Neoplatonic tradition and is
entered in a rather unacknowledged way, but nevertheless enters into Heideggerian thought
in a profound way, probably through Eckhart. And it comes deeply. The thing is, you know, Heidegger's
deeply influenced by Eckhart and he's deeply impressed by D.T. Suzuki. This is what comes out in the
dialogue with the Japanese stranger. And so again,
I keep bumping into this. And of course, I'm not an idiot. I know it's because of my own bias and my
projects and my orientation. Good Lord, I know enough psychology. But nevertheless, it seems like
these synchronicities as I keep, but I do keep finding all of these places where Zen and Neoplatonism
keep talking to each other. But what's interesting me right now, Andrew, is the possibility of sort of,
I don't know, adding a third dimension because of, I think I can call him Greg. I know him. He's going
to be on my channel. His work, his work on Theurgia and the soul on Iamblichus and the new one on
Hellenic Tantric or Tantric Hellenism. I can't remember which way it goes.
About also that Tantra has, right, this really important relationship with Neoplatonism.
He does something on this. And so now I want to ask you, he proposes like that there's this
interesting relationship between Tantra and what you see going on in Vedanta around people like
Sankara and that Tantra is like sort of the dialogical dance partner with Vedanta that the West
has kind of not heard properly. And we've sort of been, you know, from Richard. Yeah. Is that okay?
Please pick that up. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah. I was thinking about that today,
actually. I was thinking about how Vedanta and, you know, you know, people like Nisargatha and
this whole, this whole Indian tradition, what the West adopts from that is the more intellectual aspect
of it. Yeah. Because it's easier for the West to be intellectual. Whereas they've sort of forgotten
the Tantric aspect of it. They've forgotten that Nisargatha Maharaj was a Nath yogi, you know,
before he started just, you know, teaching us in a certain kind of just straightforward,
devastating kind of a way. But there is this whole, let's say, tradition. And it's the whole
Indian tradition is very clear. In terms of the Silk Road, I'm told that in Bengal,
you know, where the Mahasiddhis or the original Tantric yogis came from,
there wasn't really so much of an idea of Buddhism and Hinduism. And there was probably some
Neoplatonic influences and there was, you know, all kinds of things going on.
Yes. The Bactria and the Indo-Greek kingdom were there. Yes. Yes.
And so I guess the Tantric aspect is the elaborate aspect or the colorful aspect or the,
you know, the aspect, the complex aspect, because our minds are complex and we can't handle the
Absolute, you know, in a big punch. So we need to go through these, even though Tantric is not
necessarily separate from that, from the, you know, the Vendenta or the non-dual schools. It's playful
and fluid and expressive. And I think this is the other reason why the West can't really,
doesn't get it, either turns it into a bunch of sexy techniques or, you know, whatever they do with
it. Right. They, they, they want to literalize everything. And they want to understand it in a
very literal way, but, but it, but it's, it's, it's so, it's so primordial fundamentally and not
easily captured in, in, you know, I think, I think in, in philosophical formula, like I think
Nargajwana, for instance, became a Tantric teacher after he had deconstructed everything. So there was
just nothing left for him to do, uh, than that. Um, at least that's part of that mythology that,
that I've, I've heard. Well, this is Shaw's argument and it sounds like, and I'm glad I didn't say it,
uh, to you ahead of time, because now it just comes completely convergent. Uh, this is sort of the
Iamblican and post Iamblican critique of Plotinus, that it's very intellectual, the Neoplatonic,
but it loses the imaginal. It loses the imaginal dance. It loses the imaginal, uh, transformation
of consciousness. It loses the, uh, imaginal poesis, the poetry. It loses all the jazz, um,
in an important way. Yeah. And, and Iamblic is saying, no, no, we have to have, we have to have
rituals that, you know, imaginal augmentation of our experience that we get caught up in because
the, the intellectual power on its own is insufficient. We need, in fact, instead to
cultivate a deeper kind of receptivity so that for the advent of the one, uh, we can't just sort of,
um, ascend, um, through intellectual and philosophical endeavor. And so that sounds almost
completely, uh, parallel to what you were saying about Tantra's relationship with Vedanta.
Because, because what my own teacher told me once, the, you're, you're, you know, you're,
the luminous nature loves elaboration, the elaborations of beauty, you know, and we lose that
when we try to make everything very technical and propositional and philosophical. I often,
often find, uh, it's, um, and, and again, this is where I, this is where there's not many Buddhist
people that have that much openness to Christianity. I'm one of them because I, I think the imaginal is
deep in, in the Christian, uh, tradition, uh, in the same sense that it is in, in, in Tantra.
Um, and that, that is, that is almost, it's, it's the missing aspect. In the West, Eastern practice is
also, you know, allergic to that because, because, uh, you know, it's like, I was listening to your
conversation with, with, with Brendan, who is, you know, a lovely person with all kinds of wonderful,
wonderful ideas. And there seems, but there seems to be this need to try to make everything
comprehensible, uh, understandable to the rash, to the rational mind, which obviously has a, has,
has a necessity and a good goodness to it. But then there's this other side, which, which,
which you have to take a leap into the dangerous realm and, and, and, you know, lose that. Am I
making sense here on my, on my realm? No, no, you're making great sense, Andrew. I'm just pausing
because I want, uh, I want Chris to speak. Yeah. Well, I, I, yeah, you, I, you're, you are making a lot
of sense and I actually wanted to just sort of stay on this trail for a second, Andrew. I was going to ask you
if you're comfortable, um, I was going to ask you maybe to situate some of what you're describing
in a little bit of autobiography. Um, because I'm the idea, like the myth and motif of the
Westerner who's drawn to the East, the person who grows up within the matrix of a Christian tradition,
who finds himself called to Buddhism, for example, or to Vedanta, uh, or to the luminosity of
Shunyata that you've described. There's like a, there's a love to, there's a draw, there is a
being drawn toward beauty that I hear in what you're describing. There's almost a kind of aesthetic
appreciation. I don't mean that in the pejorative sense that I'm hearing. And there's a kind of
affinity of temperament and a correction for something that you found absent in your native
tradition that beckoned in a foreign tradition that now you find yourself more at home in. I don't
know if I've heard that right. Um, and if I have, I just wondered if you could talk a little bit more
about what it was, even if you can just approximate it, even if you don't have the words for it, what was
it in the earliest instances you can remember that beckoned to you about the East? Um, okay. Yeah.
Well, you know, there was, there was a couple of things I was reading a book about by, um, Eric
Frum and he was talking about meditation and he was describing about how to make your mind blank.
And I, and I tried to do that and I, and I couldn't, um, I realized it was rather difficult to
try to make your mind blank. And this is very, I was very young and naive at this point. And then
the other thing was, I read a book called Zen Mind Beginner Mind when I was a student.
Oh yeah. And, uh, uh, somehow that book just for, for weeks and months, I, I was, I was,
every word of that book was resonating in my mind and in my body. And I don't know why. And then
shortly after I met a, a Zen teacher at McGill, um, uh, and I started practicing, uh, you know, Zazen.
And it was just such an existential relief. Um, I wouldn't say I understood it, but it was such
as existential relief to sit in silence, uh, you know, and, and, uh, face a wall and, and, and watch
my breath. Uh, I, it was just so beautiful to me that, that, that, that all of practices could be
reduced to that. I, I couldn't think of anything more beautiful at the time. Um, but, but then I,
I did it for a while and I went on a bunch of retreats and, and I found that I was sitting there
doing nothing and my mind was just running around and around and around and around. And,
um, you know, I, Zen monks go and they live in monasteries and they, they, they spend one third
of their lives in Zazen, you know, working on koans. And, and I guess I didn't really want to do that.
Um, I guess I had, you know, desires and, um, things like that. And, and so I met a bunch of people
from, from, from, uh, you know, more tantric school, uh, Chogam Trungpa school and who were also
going to McGill at the time and, and started reading Chogam Trungpa's books, started reading
books by Lakshampa and started exploring the whole, you know, um, uh, Tibetan Buddhist world. And
during that time in the nineties, I, I met, I, I met like three or four, maybe five or six people who
are very saintly, you know, people had just come from Tibet and they had a saintly quality to them.
Um, I, I haven't, I don't know if they're around anymore, but for some reason at that time in,
in Montreal in the nineties, there were, there were, there were a few of them and I was lucky enough
to meet them. And, um, um, um, I remember, uh, I was sitting in the, uh, McGill library reading
a book by Chogam Trungpa called the Tibetan book of the dead, or his introduction to the Tibetan book of
the dead. And my mind went blank, went black. It was like, and I realized that I had this sense
that everything that I knew before was sort of paltry compared to what this was.
Um, it was, it was, and I, I lost my sort of trust in, in, in my professors in the world and
whatever direction I was going on. I, you know, I fell out of all that and I kind of wandered around
for a few years. I lived in a monastery for, for Northern Nova Scotia for a year, two years. I,
I played guitar. I was a, you know, a hippie vagabond meditator, um, for, for a long time. Um,
and, uh, there's something else I wanted, wanted, wanted to say. Yeah. And I, I began to read also
about Hindu Tantra, about, just like a Maharaj. I became kind of obsessed with, with Vedanta for a
while, while as well. And, um, and then I, then I, then I met, uh, Trachnam Kepa, who was a Westerner
who understood the, the, the, the Eastern, the Eastern and the Western traditions. And that,
that was the best thing I, I, I found because I didn't want to become a, quote unquote, Tibetan
Buddhist. I didn't want to become Japanese. I, I wanted to, I wanted to, I wanted to become Western.
You know, I wanted, I wanted to find, I wanted to find Tantric in, in Western, um, uh, spirituality
because I didn't see why it had to be Eastern particularly. Uh, so, um, I guess that's,
that's an overview, you know, in a lot of mistakes and, and, uh, um, wild experiences in between.
Could, can you say a little bit more? I, I mean, I just finished, uh, last week I was, did Albert Camus,
The Plague, and there's a character in there, Taru, uh, one of the two main characters is
Taru and Ryu, and Ryu represents Stoicism and Taru is sort of the, uh, the, the, the secular
approximation of Saint Augustine and a Christian Neoplatonist, because Camus was actually a
Christian Neoplatonist that many people don't realize that, but, um, that's another thing and
take the course. But anyways, um, uh, but Taru says, you know, I want to know how to be a saint
without God. That's the whole problem I'm up against these days. And he's on this quest for
saintliness and what it is, what it is to be a saint. And he's trying to, he's trying to, he's
trying to drop down to a really phenomenological level. He does, you know, he doesn't want to,
he's not, he's not going to buy into any supernaturalistic metaphysical explanations
of sainthood. He's really on a quest. And, and so, and, and I, I strongly identify, uh, with Taru.
And when you said that, that part of me sort of came alive. It's like, you met some saintly people.
I think I've met a person that I would regard as a sage. I've met a couple of people who have
been designated as enlightened. I don't know. I've met anybody who's saintly. I've met some
very good people. Um, would you say more about that? I mean, just unpack that, Andrew, that it
seems like that's a very, that's a very important thing to say that obviously was pivotal for you.
Yeah. Good question. I had that question too. Well, um, you know, I, I met a nun who was,
you know, in, in this little, and it was Leonard Cohen's old house. She was a Zen nun. And
just her demeanor, you know, not, not her intellect, just the purity of her demeanor in every moment
was, uh, was something that was almost devastating just to be around her. That was probably the first
teacher I'd met who was like that. And then I met this guy, this wild Tibetan yogi who was named, uh,
Kempo Soltrum Gyatso. And he was always singing and dancing, you know, uh, and, and, and he would,
he would, he was like, he was a living Socrates for sure. He even, so what he would do is he would,
he would give a, he would, he would, I was at this retreat with him and he'd wake up in the morning
with this beaming smile and just full of just something. And then he would sort of trundle down
the stairs with his eyeballs going in every direction. And, uh, he'd start speaking in
Tibetan and he had this very good translator next to him. Uh, and, uh, and he would be singing all
the time and the translator would be, you know, uh, translating his discourses. And one time he came
up to me and he, he said, how are you? And he looked at me and I was drinking a coffee and I, I,
I was a little bit hungover and I said, I'm a little bit hungover Rinpoche. And he said,
uh, he said, drink your coffee with a mind of luminous emptiness. And then he started to go
off on the discourse about, uh, you know, just like Nargajwana and it went on and on and on. And,
and his, his translator would translate next to him and then people would gather and they would be,
you know, dancing and singing. And how does that happen? I mean, it was, uh, it was, um, you know,
a bit like, you know, the story of Krishna who, who, who, who sings and all the gopis come and
follow them. And, you know, that was, that was more of the tantric, let's say transmission,
uh, meaning somebody, somebody, somebody like that.
So, so what the first sound very sort of, and since you're familiar with Nietzsche,
the first sounds very Apollonian, like her demeanor is very pure and there's a, like, there's this,
you know, gathering to presence and then the other is Dionysian and there's this opening up and,
you know, uh, breaking of the frame and, um, and, and, and, and, and being drawn towards the horizon.
So, and, you know, and maybe we'll have to talk about this because this next question is really
hard, but what's the through line between those? What's saintliness?
Well, well, um, there's an intense joy. It's, it's not, you know, some morbid martyrdom. I,
even the, the first person I, I was speaking of, I, I described her demeanor in this way, but she was,
she was very capable of telling a dirty joke and had a wonderful Zen sense of humor, right? Um,
it wasn't, it wasn't a stiff kind of discipline. It was Zen, you know, she was a, you know, a Zen nun.
So, so there was, there was a lot of discipline in practice. Um, and, and the, the other teacher was,
was had a, had a completely different demeanor, but yes, I think there is a through line between
those, those two people. And, and I guess it's just type of, of personality. And, and I guess the,
the Silk Road would be valuable for, you know, would, would have teachers of all different
types. Cause I don't think there's a type, especially with saintliness. I don't think
saintliness can be defined as a, as any particular type. I think it could be practically, you know,
anything from, from, uh, you know, you know, you know, my, my own teacher who you might think was,
was a, was a, you know, a hell's angel or something. Cause he, he doesn't come off as being spiritual at
all in any, any, any way. And you never know it. And you might think it was a Trump supporter, but,
but, you know, I think there's every kind of type and, and I think it's, it's not necessarily a visible.
I think you get that when you meet the person and they give you a transmission of who they are.
So, so yeah, yeah, yeah. I don't, I don't believe there's a, uh, an Aristotelian essence. That's not
what I'm looking for. That's why I use the word through line. And so let's make it more
phenomenological. Like, was there a, like, was it, was it that in their presence you experienced
reverence? Like, what was it, uh, like, right? It wasn't like just affection. Cause I assume you
have lots of affection for lots of people that you don't regard as saints. Right. Right. And it's not
just admiration. I know you admire a lot of people. Um, uh, and so I'm not asking you to define,
find their essence. I'm trying to ask what was common in your response to them that made you say,
I'm experiencing a saint. Um, I'm going to, I'm going to tack one question onto that,
but just consider it to be part of the same question, which is how much of it had to do with
what was said and how much of it had to do with what was unsaid. Right. Right. By that person. How much
did their, the language that they used in conversation have anything to do with this?
And what was the relationship there too? I'm also really curious. Yeah, that's cool. That's an
interesting question because, well, I'll give you another, uh, story of another teacher, teacher I met,
um, uh, in Hamburg who, uh, I met him and he was drinking, you know, Heineken beer and he had ice cubes in
his beer and, and he was smoking, um, uh, you know, a cigar and, and he was, um, you know, acting kind of
weird. He had funny hair and his clothes were all wrong. And, you know, um, all these people came
because he, he was a, he was a recognized Tolku from a particular tradition. They came to see this
guy because of his place in, in, cause he's recognized in a hierarchy. And all these people
came looking for this very spiritual experience in the spiritual person. And, um, and what happened
was he, he, he acted weird and told dirty jokes. And then the people who were looking for a spiritual
experience, you know, they all left and the people that fell in love with him, like myself, remained
and there was just a few people left. And then he started to actually teach.
Um, and he told, he told me that he drinks only in public, but he doesn't drink in his private life,
but he acts like a drunk in public. You know, this is, this is what, this is what they call
in the tradition, crazy wisdom. So, so, so I think, or, or irony also mentioned that when I'm acting silly
and when my words are like, you know, make no sense at all, I'm probably teaching more than when I'm
giving you a, you know, uh, um, giving you a, a laying out the, the, the, the, the standard, you know,
Zoch and whatever teachings in a more, um, yeah, in, in, in a more standard kind of way. So, so I would
say that 99, I would say that, you know, 1% maybe of the words and, uh, or even less, um, when, when, when,
when the real transmission is coming, that doesn't mean that the words are not important or, or the,
you know, they're, perhaps they're important because we need them. We need to work through
these things in our minds. So, so you're using a phrase here that's come back multiple times
for your way of articulating the encounter, uh, uh, of the saint, which is transmission. And I,
I take it, you're using it in a Zen sense, um, that there, and so is that, is that to your mind,
um, how you go, oh, this is a saint because you get a profound sense of transmission coming
from the person that there's a, a disclosure of a, a way, uh, into a, uh, you know, into deeper
understanding, deeper realization. Yes. I mean, they call it traditionally mind to mind, uh,
trends. Yeah. Yeah. So, so that is the traditional term and that, that is what,
what, what happens. Um, so is that the sense of it that because there's very little words,
yet there is so much transmitted that the source must be a saint. Is it that kind of thing? Because
why I'm worried about this, sorry, is, is that because in the West sainthood has degenerated into
the moral exemplar, right? The moral, the moral exemplar. And I know many people who I would
consider moral exemplars and I wouldn't, I, they don't strike me as the kind of beings we are talking
about right now. And I think there are people that like the crazy wisdom people, like you're saying,
they don't really seem like moral exemplars. They're doing something else. They're not immoral in any,
you know, vicious sense, but they're, they're, they're, they're doing something else. And that's
what I'm trying to get at. I'm trying to get at like, there's this sense of the mostly nonverbal
transmission that is transformative in some deep way. There also just sounds like there's something
implicitly aporetic about the deportment of the people that does not conform to the expected patterns
of how people show up. One of the characteristics of saints canonically is that they are in some
sense, not of this world in the way that most are of this world. Take that phrase lightly, but there's
an atopy. There's a sense in which they run counter to the current of expectation of prediction. We can't
place them. We can't model them the way that we model and predict and place people. There's something
defy that defies our capacity to gain a purchase on them. Something untamed.
Yeah. Well, you like to bring up the Aslan example. There you go. Sorry, I interrupted,
but John was talking about Aslan. We said the same thing at the same time, the Aslan example. Oh,
you said that too. Yes. Because I was thinking that when I was listening to you talk, that's a very
good description of crazy wisdom. And the Buddha is almost often, you know, the analogy is the lion,
right? Yeah. So there's a proposal that I want to make, and it's meant to not in any way be a seeking
of closure. Most of the stuff that's not categorically intelligible, most of the stuff that's atypos is
just weird or useless or bizarre, like most of the dreams we have at night. And we get up and they say,
that doesn't fit this, and therefore that's not real. But people have experiences that are not like
this, and yet they go, that's really real. It doesn't fit into all the normal categories,
but it's really real. And it calls all of this into question. They do exactly the reversal. And
I'm thinking that that's what the saint is. The saint is the person that's non-categorical,
but calls the categorical world into question rather than being easily rejected because they don't fit
into the categories. Is it something like that? Absolutely. You know, and that could be very,
you know, the stories I'm telling are stories. They're anecdotes in a sense, but it could be
something very subtle, you know? People are very attracted to crazy wisdom and some, you know,
wildness that is cool or something, but it could be something very, very subtle that you would never
even notice. Like it could be something that is some very subtle change that a person's presence
could have. I was talking to somebody who was saying that there was a time when there was a lot
of very charismatic teachers who had tons of charisma because that was what was appropriate in that
particular moment. And the time we're at now, maybe the time between worlds, the teachers aren't so
charismatic necessarily because we don't maybe need charisma. We need something more subtle or more,
you know, I'm wondering about that. And if the charismatic teachers, you know, that I've met,
they're not going to be in public. They're not going to be easily discovered. They're not, you know,
you won't be able to find them, you know, in a way they have to find you. That's often the story
is the teacher finds you. The other thing, I don't know how this relates back,
but the other thing, the other quality to go along with the proposition, this seems now to be,
this now seems to be a dialogous about sainthood, which is very interesting. How did we get here?
But the other thing is that there's a sense of concealed order, but that is nevertheless indecipherable
because someone who behaves in ways that aren't, that can't be modeled or mapped easily. It's not as
though the movements of such a person are random and absurd. If they appear absurd,
it is because the absurdity is our, is the aspect of incomprehensibility that conceals a hidden unity,
that conceals a hidden order. So the person who appears in the aspect of the saint that has a
numinous crackle at the outer edges of their persona is concealing something not, I don't mean
deceptively, but that there is actually a rhyme and reason to their movements. It's just that the rhyme
and reason to their movements is not available to our perceptions and models the way that most people's
are. And I think that that is another feature in the mix here, which is that it's not as though the
person who is not of this world is simply chaotic. It's that they might appear to be chaotic because the
frame in which we are attempting to capture them cannot accommodate the fullness of what they are.
And so there is a, there is a dissonance between our comprehension and whatever it is that they
manifest. That seems to be somehow present here. I just wanted to name that, see what you guys make
of it. I like that. It's kind of a, you know, an intimate intimation of something that is just, like, it's
awe. It's something that's just beyond your scope. But you have a sense that if you were to open yourself
up to the mystery as opposed to the, the, the cacophony, right, that there's actually a through line,
that there's something that's followable, um, to which you can be disciplined, uh, but you don't know
what it is yet, but yet you have that sense of depth. Um, uh, it, it, am I picking up on it correctly?
That there, there, that there's... Yeah, which is why you have the imitation without comprehension.
Yes. Yeah. Right. That comes with that, with the tradition of sainthood, which is you, you, you follow
in the way without actually understanding what it is that you're following, because you need the
imitation. You need to actually, if you need to affect the pattern in order for the pattern to become
comprehensible or believable because it is... Yeah. Yeah. Beyond the...
I mean, these great, the great masters or saints are not idiot savants. Um, they're not dysfunctional.
No. Um, they're not schizophrenic. They're, you know, but they might appear to be so sometimes.
That's, it's very interesting. But they, they're, I think, I think that they have fallen into a higher
order, uh, in this. And often I've noticed that, that maybe they're even more functional than, than the
rest of us. Like they're more worldly. They're more capable of being in the world. And, um, than, than we
are in some sense, uh, or more capable of just, um, you know, you know, because I think we, you know,
most human beings live about, about 10% of their, their potential and, and the great saints and masters
are living 100% of their attention, potential, or maybe potential is in the right world. Maybe their divinity
you know, if, if I can use that, these, these crazy religious words, which, which I like to use and
provoke people with. But, but I think that they're falling into, you know, utter, utter, utter divinity.
That's a possibility. That is a potential and a possibility of which we intimate, but, uh, and we, we,
we fall short of, but, but when we notice that that the, the saint is the person that, that shows you
that potential and that possibility and that, that of, of, of, of fullness and, and completeness and, and
utter, utter, you know, um, affection and love and, and wisdom, you know, happening on, on, on a level that,
you know, is, is really is beyond what most human beings can, can imagine. You know, I'm being very
provocative here, but. No, no, that's good. Good. That's, that's what we, that's what we want. Um, so I'm getting a sense,
um, like I've been making the proposal that, um, uh, you know, building off a plan year and Esther
like cap meet and other people that, and which comes out of the neoplatonic tradition that we, we, we,
we find something real when we find that it's an inexhaustible source of intelligibility. Unlike the
dream object, you know, you, you, you can't, you can sort of learn everything there is about it. The real
thing is combinatorial explosive. Um, and then the sacred object is the sacred, the sacred entity
used as neutrally as I can use that word is one in which, um, that is, that is afforded to us
through reciprocal open. And there's something about it that opens us up and then it opens up
responsibly. And then what I'm hearing you both say is like that, what we get in the saint is
somebody who somehow transmits that to us and we suddenly get opened up and they open up as we open
up and we get a sense of a trajectory of a depth of an order that exceeds our grasp, but will never
actually horrify us, um, and, and things like that. And, and well, it will horrify us. I think it will
horrify us. It will. Uh, well, maybe we're using the word in two different ways. I mean, horrify in
the sense of losing our grip on, uh, like becoming insane. Um, I think it will horrify us perhaps in the
sense of the numinous, but it, I, I, I meant more in like, like you find yourself in the shining or
something like that. Um, okay. Right. Yeah. But there is a potential in Tantra for going insane.
Um, and I think that's when some, that's when people try to imitate that kind of behavior,
um, uh, emulate that. Um, and it doesn't come from, from wisdom. It, it, it comes from, you know,
the darker aspects of the ego. Um, you know, that we have a, there's a word in Buddhism called, um,
um, I forget what it is. Uh, it, it's sort of the ego monster. Uh, it's called Rudra. Um,
and so one, one could, one could be, one could develop a simulacrum of, of that. Um, and of
course it's dangerous because maybe people meet people who are not really that and they,
and they're, they're seduced by, by, by, by a certain kind of, uh, um, behavior. And, and,
and so the whole game is very, very, very, very, very dangerous. Um, and it requires,
I think a lot of preparation, a lot of clearing the ground, a lot of real ethics, real serious
ethics, not, not, um, um, just, you know, hippie experiment, you know? Yeah, no, no, I, I, I,
that's what I was trying to get at. I was trying to get at that. There's, uh, there's a musicality to
it. It, it, uh, I, yeah, Chris, I, uh, I, I get what you're saying. There could be an element,
but I'll, I'll use the term numinous for what I think you want to put your finger on there.
Uh, right. Um, and so, but, and so the saint would strike us as really real because,
you know, when you have that moment of intimacy with the beloved and you get that sense of the
depth, the inexhaustible depth in them, and then they become really real to you. Um, and, you know,
that's the velveteen rabbit and it's also Aslan. Um, and we, we have a lot of, uh, mythological
tropes around this and I'm wondering, um, this is allowing me to form a question. Andrew,
did you experience something like, and I don't mean, I'm not excluding, but I'm not also restricting
it to eros, but did you experience something like that initial impulse that, that comes to fruition
and love when you met these saintly people? Did you feel something? Yeah. Yeah. That's what I wanted
to know. Well, I think it is a love relationship. Uh, you know, uh, I, you know, I kind of almost see
that between you two guys, uh, you know, it's, it's older and younger. Um, uh, there's, there's,
there's, there's a love relationship. You know, we, we, we limit love to, to sort of, you know, romantic,
uh, you know, relationships with the opposite, opposite, opposite sex, but you could love a man
or, or a elder, you know, so, so, so deeply that, that, that, um, it's almost like that trumps that,
that's, that's the primary love relationship and it's reflected in all of your other, other,
other relationship that, that, that is the disciple, you know, guru relationship. It's, it's,
it's a profound relationship of, of, of love and, and sort of, um, gratitude. Uh, and, and I,
and I think a lot of the problem people have today is they try to do it all themselves. Um,
so they don't, you know, allow from that, that trend elder trends transmission. Um, uh, you know,
we, we use the word guru and it's become an ugly word, uh, in the West, but, but, um, we, and are we,
we w we want to, you know, love Jesus or something, but Jesus isn't here right now, you know,
Jesus isn't, he is in, in some ways, but, but, but, but it's the person in front of you who is,
who is, who is, who is the, um, who, who embodies that, who, who is more important than Jesus or, or the
Buddha, so to speak. Yeah. And, and that figure shows up. I mean, that figure shows up in the hands of
bonafide Christians. I mean, uh, one, one thinks of the brothers Karamazov and Dostoevsky and you
have the one brother that who's clearly a saint, um, or the idiot who's a saintly figure, perhaps a
Christ figure. Um, yeah, I, I, that, well, that, um, but you put your, you put your finger on a point,
which is, and, you know, Chris and I have used the term of gurufication, uh, part of that, um,
the way the word guru has become a pejorative term, um, because there's been so much abuse,
right? And that's the problem. Yeah. That's the problem. And if the problem with that is,
you see, and, uh, and soon as we get, and again, this is death in Venice, as soon as you open
yourself up to these powers, the, the potential for also, right, uh, being overwhelmed and, and being
diverted into a self-destructive kind of decadence, which of what the story is about
is also profound. Uh, so what? Well, one thing, you know, uh, you know, you mentioned the idiot,
and I, I love that book. Um, but I, but I think the Christ figure, what was his name? Um, Prince
Michigan. Yeah. Um, again, he, he's an idiot savant in a way, whereas, whereas the, the elder or the,
you know, the, the master in the East, uh, is not an idiot savant. He's wise to the ways of the,
uh, uh, of the world. And so you can respect them on that level. Um, uh, and, uh, uh, yeah,
well, I think we, we fall too easily for the, the, the, um, the idiot, the idiot savant, uh, in the West.
Yeah, that's a good point. I like that. That's a very good distinction. That's a very fine distinction.
Do you think, um, do you think the Bodhisattva is something strongly analogous to the saint?
Yeah, sure. Uh, yeah, of course, I think it's the same, you know, it's just another word
for the, for the same thing, uh, again, and, you know, probably in the East, it's a, it's a word
that is abused, just like the word. Yeah. Saints are abused. But I remember Pema Chodron talking about
reading about these saints and there were the, and how they, you know, she didn't feel that, that, that
she could connect to them because they were also holy and, uh, they were all martyrs and they were,
you know, whereas the, some of the Eastern saints were, were magicians and, you know, really bad
people who, who changed or criminals and, you know, or who, who lived with, with prostitutes and,
um, you know, like more like Jesus, but, but, um, but I think, I think, I think the whole, there's a
problem with the sort of false holiness, um, uh, there, there has to be a earthly quality to,
to, to the, to the sage that makes him profoundly trustworthy, not, not, not, not necessarily other,
otherworldly, you know? That's why Augustine holds such a prominent place for me, uh, as a model of a
saint, because exactly that, there's no way you look at Augustine and get the idiot savant, you know,
pure holiness. Like this guy is deeply, deeply capable of self-destructive behavior and he's
honest about it and he wrestles with it. I have my criticisms of him, uh, but yeah, I, I agree with
you about that. I, I'm, I'm very, and I think that's one of the ways in which I try to distinguish
between the guru in the negative sense of the word and the guru in the saintly sense of the word.
I think the saint is somebody who is, who is willing to, um, show their sin and is willing to be open to
self-correction in a profound way. Uh, whereas the guru in the pejorative sense is trying to present
a pristine product, uh, that is beyond question in order to marshal an authority that is always beyond
question. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, the real thing for me, you're, you're struck by the intense humanness,
um, not, not, not by other worldliness. And also it's, it's, it's somebody who is,
you know, going to go to the restaurant and, you know, tip the waitress, not, not somebody who's
sitting up on a throne, you know, somebody who's very, very, very, very human, um, uh, and, and
devastatingly human, like, like somebody who goes down the mountain, not up the mountain,
you know, in the sense, somebody who comes down to, to be with, with the suffering of, of other,
others, you know, and is almost like, um, that's almost unbearable for that person. Not, you know,
somebody, you know, he, I, I, I spoke to a teacher who said that just enlightenment is unbearable
because you're open to all the suffering of the world. It's, it's an unbearable, um,
um, but state, state, state to be in no matter how, um, full it is. So there is a sense that being
here is unbearable on some level. And, and the more that we can bear the unbearable,
maybe that's a good definition of a saint. Ah, I like this, a person who's capable of bearing,
and, and bearing, bearing it for us. Is that what you're also implying? I take it.
Yeah. Bearing it, bearing it, bearing it for, for just, um, you know, not in, uh,
not in a top down sense. I think there's a with, not just a for.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Good. Good. Good. Bearing it with us,
but they're doing something nevertheless, that is demonstrative, that is exemplary because they have
a porousness. They're, they're open to the unbearable in a way that we might be closed off to.
And yet they're making that, uh, potentially bearable bias is something like that.
Yeah. I mean, the tantric yogis in Tibet eat poison, you know, and that's a metaphor for the
fact that they're, they're, they're, they're, they're eating the poison of the compassion to
taking on the poison of others. They're ingesting the poison. There's a story about yogis who drink
mercury and, you know, they're drinking our own deathliness, so to speak. That's kind of a cool
analogy. I like, and that's why poison is a very important, uh, thing in, in tantra is, is, is, is the,
is taking some of the poison and taking on the poison rather than being removed, um, uh, um,
a principle of non-rejection.
Well, well, it's also, uh, uh, important in the Socratic Platonic, Neoplatonic tradition.
The word for poison is pharmacon, where we also get medicine from and pharmacy. So the, the, the,
the wise person is not the person who gives us the nectar of the gods. They're the person who can use the
poison in the way to heal us rather than to kill us. Um, to transform it into the nectar of the god,
so to speak. Right. Yeah. At least in its, at least in its actions. Yeah. Yeah. I, I'm okay with this
kind of corny, um, romantic language because I, the tantra has a sort of, you know, outrageous romantic
quality to it. It's kind of absurd romanticism on some of it's very Baroque. So, so you have to kind of
like that. Um, um, I think people, uh, I think, I think, I think some people have sort of refined
intelligence, you know, have, have a hard time with, with, with, it's not so appealing. Um,
the taking on this kind of outrageous romanticism, you know, because you've, you've criticized
romanticism in the past. And I, I've, I've thought about that and I've thought it's, it's a,
it's a valid criticism, but what's what, what, what, what, but there's still, still,
we still have this romantic nature and what do we do with it?
Yeah. I'm going to, I'm going to turn things over to Chris for a sec, but I, like, I think the
romantics rediscovered the imaginal, but I think they, they severed it from the logos, um, because of
what had happened to the logos in the hands of the enlightenment. Um, and, um, I think what you,
what you can see in the neoplatonic tradition is the imaginal is remains bound up as it should be,
as it should be. Love and logos are both metaxu. They're both in between. They're both
tranjective. They both are at home and they belong together in the imaginal. And so my criticism, I, I now,
I'm now, I hope more careful. I now say decadent romanticism. I think the original insight in the,
the revelation, the recovery and token sense of the imaginal was something to which, for which we
should be grateful for the romantics. But I think that's that longer term severance, uh, from logos,
which to be fair to them was due to the fact that logos had been reduced to logic,
but that's the problem. So I see it in a much more, um, uh, dynamic way, uh, which of course is my
want. Um, but I'm going to stop cause I want to, Chris has been holding, uh, back and I want to hear
what he has to say. We need to hear more from Chris. Yeah. No, we don't. No, we don't. Um,
uh, well, maybe that was the moments past for it. I think I was just sitting with this idea that, um,
I mean, canonically, you know, if we, if we disambiguate what we mean by sainthood and place
it in its corresponding tradition within that tradition, the lives of the saints,
some more evidently than others cleave very closely to the sources of human decrepitude,
right? Like necessarily. So that's not an accidental feature of the life of a saint. That's an essential
feature of the life of a saint is that they make direct conscious contact with
the bedrock of sin and finitude and all that makes humanity fallen and exhausted. And the,
and the idea of manifesting an other worldly countenance and wisdom that is aporetic to the
naked eye and making contact with that bottom of decrepitude or dialectical features of the same
countenance, right? So you, like there's something, if there's something essential about that in the
story, that it's not just that, you know, this, this idea of the saint as the, the cleanly, tidy, holy,
moral, morally beneficent creature is, I think, somewhat anachronistic. I just don't, I just don't
think that's, that's what we mean. Or it's, if we're talking about something different, we're not
talking about saints, if that's what we're talking about, even though we've retroactively made them into
that. The, the, the, the, the character of the saint is its proximity to the divine and the divine
is numinous and horrific in addition to whatever else it is. And so the saint takes
and funny and humorous, of course, and ironic and there is absolutely full of humor. I want to add
that to the, and maybe that's what the East adds to the, the, the story because that's been kind of
brushed under the roof. I don't believe that one could have an intense sense of humor. Yeah.
I want to push back on you, Andrew. I think while the Bible seems to be lacking in that,
the lives of the saints are not lacking in humor. Um, that, and especially the desert fathers,
there's a lot of humor and irony in those texts. There's a lot going on, but, but what's, what's
striking me. No, I'm sorry. I don't, I mean like, like the, the watered down Christianity of. Oh, yes.
Yes. Now I understand. I see. Yeah. The mega churches and, and, and whatnot. And, and, you know,
this kind of, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I know that the essence of the saint is the same in all the
traditions. It has to be like, like, like it's, it's, it's in the Sufi tradition. It's an esoteric
Christianity. Oh, for sure. It's in tons of, in all of them, but it's, it's profoundly humorous. It's,
it's, that's so important. Because humor, humor is holding two different perspectives that could
undermine each other, but holding the tonos and resolving it with play. And what I'm hearing is
the saint is exemplary for holding the tonos of finitude and transcendence. Yes, they are proximate
to the divine, but they are also always proximate to the human and they are holding that together
in an exemplary way. Whereas we tend to, and this is what the literature like that I'm doing through
in the literature, we tend to lose the tonos and we careen between falling into our finitude and despair
or expanding into our transcendence with hubris. But the saint is exemplary, right? Of holding that
together and keeping those two things that could so readily degenerate into a clash of absurdity or
antagonism, but keeping them together. And I believe the platonic proposal that the holding of the tonos
of our finitude and our transcendence is the proper realization of our humanity, of our humanness. And so
the saint would therefore be an exemplary human being in that fashion. This is now the way I'm going to
update the proposal I'm making about what the saint is.
Yeah, that's so fully, fully like vertical and fully horizontal. Yes, exactly. And also, also fully
connected to the beyond. It's like... And in that way, in the Christian tradition, they would be
Christ-like in the way that Christ was in the incarnation, binding the human and the divine
together. But of course, that doesn't have to be a feature because there's other ways of
understanding. We talked about this last time, the interrelationship, the interpenetration of the finite and
the transcendent. And it's humor. Yeah, yeah. And it also brings up this question again about the
Camus quote, right? Can one be a saint without God? And, you know, one way of thinking about the role of
humor and its necessity, and its relationship to wisdom and numinosity is... The way I sometimes like
to think of it as this, you know, the human being cannot hear the voice of God directly. But as it
makes its way through the principalities to the human ear, the sound that is most proximate to it is
laughter. And so the saint can hear the laughter. The saint can hear the laughter. That's very interesting
because laughter sits on the border between speech and non-speech. And it's filled with flow. It's filled
with insight. It's filled with de-selfing. You're de-centered when you're laughing. Yeah, that's very,
very good, Chris. That's very, very good. I like that. That really captures it a lot. We should move
towards wrapping this up. This is our usual amount of time for Voices with Ruby.
Oh, it's just getting started. Don't try. I was just getting started.
It's always just getting started when it finishes. Well, it's just getting started.
I like the fact that the Silk Road, and I think this was completely
right and germane. The Silk Road became a dialogos about sainthood. I think there's a reason why that
happened. And I don't want... And there's an intuition, and I'm not going to probe for the intuition.
Like, I don't want it explicated right now, but I just want to acknowledge it. There's a connection
there, a deep one. I think the pilgrimage on the Silk Road is enmeshed with the saint
in some way. Not that the pilgrims are saints, but they're typically following, I don't know what to
call the milestones, haha, that have been cast by the saints along the way.
That is what a pilgrimage is by definition, isn't it? Following the path of the saints.
Exactly. Exactly.
What else would it be? We're walking in their footsteps.
Exactly.
And what's the word I'm looking for? It's not even praying. It's supplicating their wisdom in our
frailty and in our misunderstanding and in our ignorance, you know? We need that download of energy.
I mean, the pilgrimage, insofar as it's a quest, is something that deeply reminds us of our finitude
by making us sore and exhausted and tired and sick, while also orienting us towards the horizon of
transcendence. And so, yeah, I think we have to... And it's aspirational. And the thing that predicts
successful aspiration are reliable role models, and I think the saints are appropriate. I'm going to thank my
dear friend, Chris, and give him a chance to say any final word. And then, Andrew, as always,
we have the guest. You're both guests, but this is your first time, I think, on the channel. We give you
the final, final word. And it can be whatever kind of word you want. You can be provocative,
you can be summative, you can be cumulative, whatever. But I'm going to turn it to Chris first,
and then it's to you, Andrew. And I just want to, right now, my final word,
other to say goodbye to everybody is to thank both of you very deeply.
Thank you. This was fun, as it always is. Over to you, Andrew.
Yeah. Thank you for giving me a vocabulary and the ongoing conversation, and just for being so present,
present in my life and in the reflections, you know, I'm making it. I deeply appreciate you guys,
and thanks for having me, you know, talk about my own stuff. I appreciate that. And obviously, to be
continued, I hope. Yes, very much. Thank you, my friends.
