Grace, welcome to Scotonomics. Can you tell our audience a bit about yourself? Your book,
Vulture Capitalism, which we're going to talk about today, really is so impacting on me like the
Schott Doctrine, but please do tell us about yourself first. So yeah, I'm Grace Blakely. I am
an author of a few books, including this one, Vulture Capitalism, which we're going to talk
about today. I am a kind of economics commentator and political commentator, so I write for Tribune
Magazine. I used to write for The New Statesman. I appear quite a bit in the media, so just did
Question Time, which was good fun, and all that sort of jolly stuff. But yeah, the main thing I do
is write books and talk about them. You're an Oxford or Cambridge graduate, though, aren't you?
Oxford, yeah, for my sins. And what did you study there?
I did the degree that every single terrible person who has ever run this country has done,
or our respective countries, politics, philosophy, and economics.
Look, it's a good way to know the enemy, isn't it, Grace?
I would say so, yeah. To fraternise with them.
So, Grace, in your introduction, you state that living under capitalism, a system of pervasive
unfreedom, but how could anyone object to a free market? And are these markets truly as free as they
purport to be? So, the whole premise of the book, the argument of the book, is that capitalist
societies aren't really free market societies. And, you know, one of the reasons that I wanted to write
this book was to kind of take apart the misconceptions that people have about capitalism and also about
socialism. So, the inspiration was that I was doing a lot of interviews and things during the
COVID-19 pandemic. And this has been after the 2019 election. I had been, you know, quite vociferously
campaigning for Jeremy Corbyn. And I was asked on a lot of these news shows, you know, the government's
doing loads of stuff, it's bailing out loads of businesses, it's spending loads of money, you got
what you wanted, even though, you know, Labour didn't win the election, you got socialism because the
government's spending loads of money. And I started to get really frustrated with this, this misconception and
misunderstanding as to what socialism was. I think perhaps because of the legacy of the Cold War,
a lot of people seem to have this view of kind of capitalist and socialist societies, as divided
between kind of free markets, US style systems, and centrally planned Soviet style systems, with the
idea being that in the US, you know, the market decides the production allocation of resources,
and in the USSR, the state decides everything. So there seemed to be this idea that if you get more state,
that means more socialism. And if you get kind of more market, that means more capitalism. And it was
just very clear to me that that was a really fundamental misreading of the way that capitalism
works. And there are a number of reasons for this. Firstly, capitalist systems aren't free market systems.
And secondly, there isn't this separation between politics and economics between states and markets,
under capitalism, that you might expect from, you know, the the world view that I've just outlined.
So first and foremost, capitalism isn't a free market system. Most like big markets within capitalist
societies within the global economy are dominated by a couple, you know, maybe like four or five
massive multinational corporations that dominate their industry, and which are capable of wielding immense
amounts of power in the economies in which they are headquartered and in the global economy as well.
So they have kind of monopolistic or oligopolistic power within these markets. And that allows them
really to plan who gets what, you know, the whole free market idea is that in an actual market, nobody has
the power to plan because the market basically decides everything, you know, there's lots of different
firms all competing for, you know, the same kind of market share. And if any of them goes wrong, makes the
wrong decision, if the managers kind of invest in the wrong thing at the wrong time or put prices up, then they
will lose customers. And ultimately, they will go under because there are so many other firms for consumers to
choose from. This is not obviously how most markets work, but it's very, very far away from how markets work under
capitalism, because you have these massive corporate giants that don't really have this market discipline
pushing them in all these different directions, they're really able to make active decisions to plan
who gets what. And then I look in the book at how that planning takes place within the organization.
So how these kind of organizational hierarchies exist to basically dominate and control labor to control
workers, and how that planning works at a societal scale and at a global scale. And so how, you know,
corporations can wield corporate sovereignty, how they have kind of imperial power, how they're able
to kind of, you know, manipulate markets, and kind of even manipulate law and create their own kind of
versions of law as well. So because, you know, these corporations have so much power, they're able to plan
and it's not really a free market system. But there's also just that the state isn't separate from the
market. So we have this kind of liberal view, which is that, you know, if markets aren't working very
effectively, so if there is a bit too much market power amongst a few corporations, then it's the
state's job to step in and enforce competition or kind of regulate those markets more effectively.
The issue is, is that the state can't do that, because what happens within the state is influenced
by the balance of power in society as a whole. So if big corporations have a lot of power over the
economy, they're also able to wield that power within the states, they're able to influence politicians,
they're able to influence legislation, regulation, really kind of shape, you know, the political
environment, as well as the economic environment. So these two fields of power aren't separate. And
in fact, they tend to reinforce each other. So capitalism is a system based on a kind of fusion
of public and private power in service of the interests of those at the top. And I've got a bunch
of examples in the book that show precisely how that works.
Yes, so we're going to come on to some of those. So, so, but before that, I'm going to talk about
more philosophical aspects of the book as well, because you go into, so you talk about Friedrich
Hayek, you know, who was the author of The Road to Sarfdom. But most people probably know this,
that, you know, Thatcher was a big fan, and she used to carry this book around with her. But, you know,
he, he, he was quite clear that, you know, these were freedoms, this market freedom, these were
freedoms that some people could enjoy, but not everyone, he was quite honest about that. And
what I wanted to bring to your attention as well, was a fabulous speaker, Scottish speaker,
and, and I'm trying, Jimmy Reid, and he was on Parkinson years ago, and he was talking about
this very distinctly. And we'll maybe put that clip in later. And so, you know, Hayek and also
Keynes as well, they both had quite a, you know, a patronising look at society, they didn't really think,
you know, that society, as a whole, could really influence events, and it was really up to the
elites. And, you know, I was really taken aback, most especially by the thinking that Keynes thought
this way as well. Yeah, so, you know, I think the reason I look at Hayek and Keynes is they're
traditionally pitched as the two kind of, you know, heroes of the battle in economics that took place
over the course of the 20th century, which I think is fair, you know, these were the
central figures in the movements for social democracy when it comes to Keynes and neoliberalism
when it comes to Hayek. And, you know, the battle lines were effectively around the size of the
size of the state and the power of the state within nominally market economies. Now, Keynes was obviously
writing in the wake of the Great Depression, and his work centred around how to kind of tame the
irrationalities of market systems. So he saw that, you know, because of the kind of psychology that
underpins human behavior in free markets, or just in markets in general, you can get these big booms
and big crashes, and you can get kind of collective action problems regarding issues like investment,
for example. So, you know, if everyone's pessimistic about the future, nobody invests,
and then they create the kind of scenario that they're kind of, that they most fear. So the
state's role is to kind of step in and almost solve some of these collective action problems
by investing when no one else will invest, or kind of, you know, enforcing competition and regulating
the excesses of some of the biggest actors within these markets, and particularly also taming the power
of finance, which tends to exacerbate both the ups and the downs of these cycles by like pumping credit
into the booms and, and pulling the rug out during the busts. So Keynes was very optimistic about the
capacity of the state to tame the market, basically. And that was the foundation of social democracy.
And with that Keynesian thinking was the foundation of the social democracy of the post-war period.
Now, whilst Keynes had this, you know, pretty kind of rosy view of how the state could work,
the only reason we actually ever got social democracy, it wasn't because suddenly politicians
turned around and all decided that Keynes was right, there was a bit of that going on,
it was primarily the fact that working people were so well organised in the wake of particularly
the Second World War, when you'd had the demands of the war economy for employment, etc, that they demanded
a lot of things that Keynes had been talking about alongside things like, you know, welfare state,
investments in social security, etc. So you had this alliance basically between kind of workers and
unions on the one hand, and Keynesian thinkers on the other hand, that pushed through this social
democratic shift that saw, you know, a much more active state, a kind of corporatist model really. And by
corporatist, I mean, the state playing a role as kind of mediator between capital and labour between
workers and bosses. So you had workers, bosses and politicians all kind of working together sitting
around the proverbial table to plan what was going on in the economy, right? This is the argument I make
in the book is that, you know, all capitalist societies have an element of planning within them.
The question is, who is involved within that planning? Under social democracy, workers had a seat at the
table alongside bosses and politicians and representatives of the state. The transition to
neoliberalism, this was all framed around Hayek's view, that the state had gotten too big, and that
we needed to shrink the state to create greater space for the market. And he had, you know, this very
interesting perspective about how markets work that was based around complexity theory, you know, the idea
that economies are too complex to centrally plan, and that doing so will create, you know, unforeseen
consequences as well as kind of corruption and lead us all down the road to serfdom.
So his argument that was, we need to kind of, you know, basically tame the social democratic state
and do a lot of things that the neoliberals ended up doing. But the argument in the book,
I make in the book is that actually existing neoliberalism did not shrink the state at all.
It did cut state spending in some areas, particularly when it comes to support for workers,
but spending also increased in other areas. So, you know, particularly around when we're
thinking of, you know, handouts to big businesses, the revenue loss in the form of tax cuts, subsidies
to big businesses, and a lot of kind of off balance sheet support, implicit subsidies by central banks,
outsourcing, all of this other stuff, where a lot of private activity still relied on the state,
but it wasn't necessarily actively being undertaken by the state, as well as the dramatic expansion in
the kind of police authority of the state when it came to kind of breaking up unions and crushing
demonstrations, you know, all those anti-union laws and stuff, the power of the state was used to kind
of split up and divide working people as well. So the state didn't get smaller by any stretch of the
imagination with the neoliberal shift. What happened, and this I argue was always really the aim of the
neoliberal movement, if not Hayek himself, was that workers lost their seat at the table. So the social
democratic model was planning, tripartite planning, basically, and with the shift to neoliberalism in
the 1980s, workers lost their seat at the table. And instead, you had centralised planning that was taking
place just amongst representatives of large corporations and financial institutions, alongside
politicians and bureaucrats within the state. And this is kind of how capitalism has been throughout
most of its history, the social democratic period was the exception rather than the rule that workers
had an input into this process. But the fact the existence of planning didn't change under neoliberalism.
So this is why, you know, Hayek's arguments are kind of interesting to apply to the neoliberal states,
because this idea that you can't centrally plan something as complex as the economy,
is a criticism you could level at neoliberal governments, at every government, basically,
that has been inspired by Hayek, because they have, you know, nominally kind of privatised certain
things, nominally deregulated other things, but actually increased the kind of orbit of the state,
increased the reach of the state into lots of different areas of the economy, and indeed into lots of
different areas of society as well. And this all culminated, of course, with the financial crash
in 2008, when the government just said, right, well, you know, all of the liabilities of the private
sector, we'll just soak them all up and bail the bankers out and then impose the costs on everyone
else. And that really showed that the argument that planning is based in a capitalist economy was
never really about planning, because this is matters of planning on a mass scale. It's actually about who gets
the to plan, who has the right to sit at that table where the planning is taking place.
Yeah, I want to move on to the chapter that you wrote about Boeing. And I want to give some
some insight into the just the horror of this story that you start off with. So 2018, Jakarta, 2019,
181 passengers on board the plane, as well as six cabin crew, and two pilots died. And in 2019,
Airlines Flight 302 had plummeted out of the sky and hit the Earth at a speed of 700 miles per hour.
The wreckage from the flight was driven 30 feet into the surrounding Earth, and the impact crater was
90 feet wide and 120 feet long. All 157 people on board died instantly. This is shocking. And how did
Boeing allow this to happen? Yeah, so the Boeing story is really, really shocking. And it's a fantastic
example of kind of capitalist planning gone wrong, basically, and how, you know, large corporations can
get away with so much and then basically, you know, feel no accountability. Because the market is not going
to impose costs on a firm as big as Boeing. And even if it did, it was protected so much by the American
state. So this isn't actually just a story about Boeing. It's a story about Boeing in alignment with the US
states. So the 737 MAX disasters, as you've just highlighted, were two plane crashes involving the Boeing 737 MAX
planes. Now, these planes have been manufactured by Boeing to, they were called the 737 MAX because
they wanted to, they wanted to make a plane that was seen to be as similar as the Boeing 737, which is one
of the most successful plane designs ever. And Boeing had made agreements with a bunch of airline carriers
that the planes would not require any new training, so the pilots wouldn't have to be retrained. So they
would be as similar to the 737 MAX as possible. But the issue was, is that these were not smaller 737 MAX
planes, they were massive. And the reason that they wanted to make these planes so much bigger was that
it increased profits to the airline carriers, because it allows you to get more people onto a single
flight. But to do that, they had to make these planes with massive, massive engines. And then, you know,
for issues to do with how the plane takes off and lands, they had to shift those engines back on the
plane. And they found that the positioning of the engines by with their size create this problem that
the plane had a tendency to stall. So this is, you know, a really significant problem. But rather than
dealing with the problem head on, they decided to create this software fix, which is basically,
whenever the plane starts to stall, a sensor on one of the wings detects the stall, and then automatically
pushes the plane's nose down in the ground, basically to stop it kind of tilting up like that.
So it pushes the plane's nose down. And this was called the MCAS system. Now, this was an automatic
system that it would have been, you know, extremely difficult to correct manually, because of the force
that was pushing the plane down into the ground. It wasn't, you know, part of the pilot's training. So
they weren't really aware as to what this system was, the pilots who were flying this plane. And it was
only connected to one sensor. So if there was a malfunction on one of the sensors, as is what
happened in both of those plane crashes, then the nose of these planes would just dive out of the sky
and just plummet into the air, you know, killing everyone on board. Now, it emerged in the wake of
these crashes. At first, Boeing tried to blame the pilots, but emerged in the wake of these crashes,
that senior executives at Boeing had known about the problems with the plane about many, many problems,
not just this, multiple different problems with this plane before it went to market. The regulators
had basically been asleep at the wheel because they had moved to this philosophy, the FAA had moved to
this philosophy of self-regulation, which was the same philosophy as that which underpins regulation
of finance before the financial crisis. And effectively, well, Boeing was actually being regulated
by a unit which sat inside Boeing and whose employees were paid by Boeing. And so there was just a massive
conflict of interest here. And the FAA kind of highlighted some problems with the plane,
but these were effectively ignored, and it was allowed to go to market anyway. Boeing had also
spent a lot of time and resources lobbying regulators to reduce regulation around the airline industry,
constantly putting forward this argument that, you know, they operate in a competitive market and no
manufacturer would deliberately manufacture a plane that was faulty, they would have very rigorous
standards because doing so would kind of undermine its business. Now, this argument is something that
has been disproved quite clearly in the wake of these extraordinary crashes and all of the chaos that
has befallen Boeing since then. But it was, you know, a one that was used to kind of change the nature
of the regulation in the run up to these crashes as well and entrenched this philosophy of self-regulation.
On top of all this, you know, this was really the culmination of the transformation of Boeing
that had taken place over several previous decades. And so Boeing had been kind of renowned as a firm
that really placed engineering expertise at the core of its business and really respected engineers
and pilots and pilots are kind of always in control of Boeing planes, which is why they like to supply
them. But it was during the 80s that Boeing kind of abandoned those commitments and those values
and really shifted towards becoming a company that was solely concerned with maximizing shareholder value.
And part of that was to do with a merger that took place between Boeing and another firm, McDonnell
Douglas, and that was kind of running into the ground. But it was really important for the US
military industrial complex, which supplied a lot of it was important basically for the US state that
McDonnell Douglas kind of survived. So the state organized this merger between Boeing and McDonnell Douglas.
And McDonnell Douglas's culture, which kind of was oriented around like cost cutting
and like managerialism rather than kind of prizing engineering expertise, really became embedded within
Boeing. And under successive CEOs, particularly Harry Stonecipher, who oversaw the development of the 737 Max,
this culture of just like slashing costs, like undermining engineering expertise,
lionizing middle management, and really just focusing solely on shareholder value became really
ingrained and embedded within the firm. And that's the kind of cultural shifts that underpinned
the failings around the 737 Max, because whistleblowers had come forward, you know, there was a lot of
concern about these claims, but it was ignored basically to protect the bottom line. So that was
the kind of the context. And as you can see, the American government had already been very, very involved
with what had been going on, whether that's in the form of, you know, the changing regulation to which
the firm was subjected, or this merger that had taken place. But Boeing was also one of the biggest
recipients of corporate welfare in the whole of the United States at the time. So it had massive tax breaks,
massive subsidies, at a state and a federal level, it was it had lots of like government contracts. So you
know, it was quite dependent upon that. And then even after the 737 Max disasters, it got a massive
backdoor bailout, basically, during the COVID-19 pandemic, this was after wrongdoing had come to
light. And there have even been kind of criminal charges that have been brought against the company.
So the Boeing story really does show that it doesn't operate in this competitive market. It's
this kind of monopolistic market structure, it's just Boeing and Airbus competing. And Boeing, because
it has such close links with the American state, you can always rely on that political support to make
sure that it stays afloat. So even after these massive crashes, when you would read that and think,
I'm never flying on a Boeing plane again, it's still operational, it's still manufacturing planes,
it's still selling planes, despite all of this chaos that would have put any other firm under.
Now that isn't a real market. That's a corrupt market. It's a market that's, you know, so dominated
and controlled by a couple of institutions and their political allies, that it doesn't really function
as a market anymore.
It's such a good example.
Yeah, and for our watchers and listeners, this chapter was particularly shocking for me. Some of
the details in it really are blood curdling. I want to move on to Ford. It's not the cuddly man
who paid his workers enough so that they could buy the products that they made. Can you tell us a
little bit more about Ford?
Yeah, so I picked the example of Ford because it's this company that traverses the whole of the 20th
century, basically. So it kind of becomes operational around the 1900s and stays in business,
you know, up to this day. So I thought it'd be an interesting way to kind of study the transformations
of capitalism that we've seen throughout this period and see what's changed and what stayed the same.
So what's changed between the transition from laissez-faire pre-Great Depression capitalism
through to social democratic capitalism through to neoliberal capitalism.
And Ford turns out to be a really great case study for understanding these changes because
the nature of Ford's business and Ford's management and its relationship with the state
does change over this period. But the thing that remains the same is that Ford is never operating
really in a market and always has very close relationships with the state. And the authority
and power of Ford's managers over the company and indeed in some senses over society as a whole
is always quite significant, although it is challenged more at different periods. So, you know,
Ford emerges, it, you know, is definitively a monopoly because it's, you know, at first the only kind of
company really producing cars has a huge amount of market power. Ford himself is this weird character
who is virulently anti-Semitic. He like pushes all these kind of anti-Semitic conspiracy theories,
is even mentioned positively by Hitler. And, you know, is very keen on keeping the US out of any
involvement with the Second World War. He's also, relatedly, extremely anti-union, so absolutely
hates unions, hires thugs to basically go and beat up union organizers. And is someone who is obsessed
with having a very rigid control over the life of his workers. So he's this kind of like ardent,
like, you know, Christian fundamentalist type, who, you know, wants basically workers to kind of behave
in certain ways and tries to enforce that. He doesn't do so very successfully until he introduces
the $5 day, which is actually composed of a $2.50 basic wage and then a $2.50 top up,
which is contingent upon a bunch of behavioral guidelines, including the workers not drinking,
their wives not working outside the home, all of this stuff that Ford really wanted to kind of push
on his workers to try and control them. And obviously, a big part of the reason for this giveaway was
to undermine the threat of union organizing, which was building at that time. So this is very, you
know, it's a very hierarchical company with this guy Ford at the very top kind of managing everything.
He also, during this period, during the 30s, tries to set up a rubber plantation in the Brazilian Amazon.
So he buys up this wave of land and basically runs it almost as like a kind of mini state,
ships a load of Americans out into the Brazilian Amazon, creates a little American village with like
picket fences, golf courses, swimming pools, very odd, and hires a bunch of local workers that he keeps
in very different conditions. And again, tries to kind of subject them to these like rigid controls.
But the whole thing is a disaster, the workers rebel, a lot of the managers die of diseases,
and they're not very good at harvesting rubber anyway. And eventually, they come up with a synthetic
alternative that means that the whole project kind of doesn't really get off the ground. But again,
it shows the ambition of this guy, he kind of acts as though he's like, you know, an imperial planet,
or a colonist, I suppose, like an imperialist that can go up and just buy up a whole swathe of land
and be like, this is my little mini, he literally called it Fordlandia, it's my mini kind of territory,
and govern it as he governs his own company, as he governs workers and tries to exert these rigid
controls over their behaviour. And so the power that this guy has is really, really significant.
The power and authority that he's able to exercise over his workers, and over society as a whole,
very significant, because again, he doesn't have that many competitors. And he's very closely aligned
with the American state as well. This corporation only escalates during the Second World War,
Ford is playing both sides. So there are Ford companies that are supporting the German war machine,
Ford factory, sorry, that are supporting the German war machine. And Ford is also manufacturing a huge
proportion of, you know, certain, like aircraft and weapons and things that are used by the US as
well. And during this time, kind of cooperation between Ford and the government steps up, there's
like a whole new factory that's built with a load of support from the US, and they just become very,
very closely intertwined. And this is the kind of, this is also a period during which his workers
start to get organised. And Ford doesn't like this very much. But eventually, the UAW wins recognition,
and is able to really fight to get a seat at the table. And this obviously reflects the trends that
we were talking about earlier, you know, the demands of the war economy, full employment, a general kind of
increase in workers power that are taking place over this period, so that when the Second World War ends,
Ford's workers are just much stronger and more powerful relative to Ford. And this is also the
kind of beginnings of like, you know, social democratic capitalism. So the state is taking this role
as a kind of mediator between bosses and workers, there's lots of industrial disputes within Ford at
the time, and within a lot of the other auto manufacturers. And the US state in various different
ways, including setting up a budget committees, tries to act as the mediator, basically trying to balance the
interests of workers and bosses to kind of come through to an agreement. And just the fact that
workers are included in that process is an indication of how much their power has increased
since the 30s. So over this, you know, this time period, you get a Ford that is kind of really in
expansion mode, it's, you know, producing a lot as employment is increasing a lot, but its workers are
kind of demanding much higher wages, eventually, you get to a point around the time of the neoliberal
transition, you've got competition from abroad. And the managers at Ford are angry, because this is
a point at which profits are being squeezed by that global competition. So the post war period,
you can kind of think of as like a pie expanding period. So there's not as much conflict as you
might expect between workers and bosses, given how much more powerful workers are getting, because the
pie is kind of increasing. But when you start to see that that growth slow, because of the pressures of
international competition, along with a whole bunch of other things like the oil price spike,
then that conflict really pushes back into the fall. And so a bunch of these committees that
have been set up start to break down, you start to get more threats of kind of union organizing.
But partly because of the kind of changing political context as well, the bosses ultimately
end up winning, they say, you know, we can't give you higher wages, because we've got competition from
Japan. So we're actually going to, you know, cap your wages, automate a lot of production,
and massively reduce employment. So from the 80s, employment at Ford really falls drastically.
And what's interesting as well, and I think this is really pertinent to the argument that you see
among the neoliberals about, you know, free market capitalism, Ford, rather than kind of becoming
this more efficient and competitive firm due to international competition, it shifts from being
just an auto manufacturer to an auto manufacturer slash financial institution. By 2008, most of Ford's
profits are actually coming from its lending arm, which lends to consumers to allow them to buy cars.
And because of this, it built up a huge amount of debt kind of, you know, astonishing for a motor
company. And it was really, you know, under threat when the financial crisis hit. So obviously,
it gets a backdoor bailout, it doesn't get kind of direct TARP funding from the US. But there's
a kind of back route that Ford goes through that I talk about in the book that allows it to get a big
loan to cover some of those costs. And again, you see employment decline, you know, Ford in general,
in this state of decline, and, you know, becoming even more deeply enmeshed with the US government,
basically, so that it's hard to kind of see where the market ends and where the state begins by this
point. And Grace, I was just going to say, just if I can take you back to kind of Ford in the 1920s,
30s, 40s, and I don't think it's covered in your chapter, but I just kind of wanted to highlight
the relationship between Ford, big oil, and the American state. And this takes you right through
to the huge road building programme that was going on in the state, because there's no demand for a car
if there's no roads. So the state is deciding that personalised vehicles are what the people of America
demand. And they're doing that by providing the services for it. And also big oil is there looking
for a customer, which which you can now have with them with with personal vehicles, and also the
stories around some of the vehicle companies buying electric trams. I think San Francisco is one example
where they bought the electric tram system and ran it into the ground made it lost a huge amount of
money. They turned all the services off, basically. And then I said to people, well, electric trams
don't work, you have to have cars. And again, there was a huge support from the American government to
move people towards this personal consumption. And I think that really helps emphasise or underline the
main point that I got from your book was how this social surplus is designed by the establishment. And,
you know, they are looking at the products and the services that they will be able to make the most
money from that benefit them. And they provide that. And if they're not interested in using those
products or services, they're not provided. And I think the example I like to give is you look at
the high street, there's a reason that our high streets are in such poor repair. And that's because
the establishment don't shop on the high street. And it's the same with the National Health Service,
they're not using the health service. So why put a huge amount of resources to that? And for me,
that was a wonderfully made point and theme across all of the stories that came across in your book.
Yeah, that's a really good point. I hadn't actually thought about that. I didn't really know
that about the US road building programme. But yeah, it seems like that's a really, really critical
point. Because as you say, the whole infrastructure of America, when you look at like the planning of
cities and its infrastructure, it's all designed around cars and planes. And it didn't obviously have
to be that way. And Boeing, Ford, we're very well from it. Yeah, exactly. So I think a lot of our
listeners and viewers may be already aware of the clear line that you paint between the first Suez
crisis, and the Yom Kippur War in October 1973, and then the rise of neoliberal governments. The more
recent Suez crisis was caused by the Taiwanese container ship the Ever Given on the 23rd of March 2021.
What you revealed there was that 10 companies control 85% of global shipping capacity, and they
collude with each other in plain sight of the regulators. Can you tell us more about this?
Yeah, so this was a story that I was looking into actually during the pandemic was the chaos that was
going on in global shipping. And this was something that kind of was taking place across 2021 and
2022 basically, that because of lockdowns, like constraints on people's movements, and like
really strict border controls, a lot of container ships weren't able to dock in the ports that they
were supposed to, they were supposed to dock in. And you can really think of the system of global
shipping as this very finely tuned machine. So you know, one ship goes into a port, unloads as
quickly as conceivably possible, leaves, another ship comes in, you know, it's all like lots of
different moving parts. So when that starts to break down, it creates these ripples throughout
the whole system. And suddenly, nobody can go anywhere. So there was this period where there
were tons and tons of ships, and you could see them in various different ports, like off California
and China, just out at sea, unable to dock, unable to move with obviously lots of very poorly paid
workers stuck on those ships for extended periods of time. And so that was, you know,
partly just a problem that had come about due to the imposition of lockdowns. But it reflected this
broader issue, which was the moves towards like the steady moves towards containerization and these
massive, massive mega ships that take a really long time to load and unload, and kind of introduce
more potential blockages into the system, because they can only go to certain ports,
they require a lot of labor, and a lot of kind of specialized equipment to move things around.
And when one of them gets, you know, is unable to dock in this port that it's supposed to be going
to, it creates these backlogs that really kind of reverberate throughout the whole system. They also
create this problem of like getting stuck in the Suez Canal. So the Ever Given obviously got stuck in the Suez
Canal, which again, exacerbated these problems, or maybe creating an even bigger backlog. Because,
you know, a lot of ships basically had to, like not do the Suez Canal and go around the Cape of Good
Hope, which, you know, creates massive, massive more delays. So, you know, global shipping was in chaos,
right? It was partly to do with these trends that have been pushed by the big shipping companies,
because obviously, you know, it's a similar sort of thing with with the airline manufacturers,
the more people you can get onto a plane, the more profit the airline carriers make,
the more containers you can get onto a ship, the more profits the shipping companies make.
So this has been a whole reason for like the transformation of infrastructure that has changed
the kind of spatial geographies of entire countries, right? If you have one massive ship that can only
go into one very, very deep water port, suddenly a bunch of communities that have been based around
docks are like, you know, unable to provide employment anymore, which is something that you've seen
in a lot of different places and all around the UK, as I'm sure you both well know.
But when you get up to COVID, and this whole system breaks down, you eventually start to see this
showing up in massive profits being made by the shipping companies, because they exploit this chaos
to charge astonishingly high rates for anyone who needs their goods shipped. And this combines also with
an increased demand for goods, because people can't consume services anymore, because economies are locked
down. So, you know, the classic example is the gyms are closed, so everyone's buying a Peloton or whatever.
So there's high demand for goods, chaos and global shipping, the shipping companies jack up prices
massively. And what's really interesting about this is, you know, we're told about inflation today.
It's all the result of the war in Ukraine and rising oil prices. But actually, a part of it is to do with
these shipping costs, because the lag between the costs of shipping something and the prices on the
shelves is about a year, a year and a half. So a lot of the kind of post COVID inflation that we saw
with at least partly to do with this massive increase in shipping costs that we've seen over
2021-2022 and to an extent 23.
Or profiteering, Grace, we could call it. Exactly. Have gone and have been sucked out of the profits of consumers
and into the pockets of these giant shipping companies that are run by some of the wealthiest people in the world.
Yeah, I'm going to come to the last chapter as well. So taking back control, in your last chapter, you talk about
the decentralization that could have been in Chile under Elendi's government. Do you think that he moved too fast for the time?
And do you think that he could have succeeded today with all the technological advantages that he would
have had today? You know, the big problem that Allende faced is the problem that all governments
in the Global South face, which is the problem of imperialism, basically. And this was particularly acute
at the time that Allende was trying to do this, because obviously it was in the context of the Cold War.
And there was this idea that, you know, no even like moderate form of socialism would be acceptable to
the US in its backyard, i.e. in most of South America. And, you know, the United States had propagated
some horrendous, basically, crimes throughout Central and South America over the course of the
preceding decades to kind of undermine the threat of socialism, often supporting into power horrendously
authoritarian, brutal governments. Whether you look at this, what happened in Guatemala, for example,
with the United Fruit Company, which I talk about. Or, yeah, of course, what happened in Nicaragua
and what's happening, what happened in Chile under Allende. So Allende comes to power, tries to implement
this kind of neither Washington nor Moscow model of democratic socialism, which is based on kind of
worker control, like citizen control over public services, decentralization, a real democratization of
society. So it's not a kind of centralized plan. He was actually very, well, a lot of people in
his government were really au fait with systems theory, which is what Hayek had used to write
about the economy. And they knew that like a really rigid central plan wasn't going to work. So they
kind of wanted to create a kind of democratic alternative. And they did that using the technology
that was available to them at the time, which wasn't particularly sophisticated. And they might have been
able to do a lot better had they had access to kind of two different kinds of technologies like the
ones we have today. But the main issue was that the US would not let this happen. And you know,
when you've got a massive superpower that is saying, you will not do this, and when you don't have the
kind of global South solidarity that allows poor countries to come together and say, you can't stop us,
then there's not really any way around it. This is why, you know, any kind of attempt at socialism is
always really has always really struggled in global South countries, even up to this day. And
it's why a lot of socialist leaders end up pursuing much more moderate approaches, like, for example,
Lula in Brazil, during his first term. And, you know, that is a real problem. It's not something that
you can just kind of get around. But it's also why, you know, the potential for kind of socialist
organizing is so important in rich countries, as well as poor countries, right? Because if you were
to look at the global economy today, you'd be like, Oh, well, if revolution is going to happen anywhere,
it's going to happen in the poor world where people are kind of denied basic rights, they are, you know,
often living in extreme poverty, their governments are completely unaccountable and corrupt. And, you know,
you would think there's the potential as well as the opportunity for kind of labor organizing that
would really challenge this model. The issue is imperialism, which keeps, you know, what, like,
it keeps maintains in power governments that crush these attempts to organize, and just, you know,
oversees a system that thoroughly disempowers workers in the global South. What we really need
is kind of international solidarity, in the sense that, you know, a socialist movement in the rich world
could definitely support socialist movements in the poor world, literally just by getting out of the
way, as well as doing things like, you know, undermining tax avoidance innovation, like London,
for example, the city of London facilitates a huge amount of tax avoidance innovation that sucks wealth
out of the global South, and redesigning some of the rules of the international rules-based system
that are actually heavily weighted in favor of rich economies. But, you know, the whole meaning of
international solidarity should really be about, you know, socialist movements in the rich world,
supporting socialist movements in the poor world, and undermining threats by their governments, like
the threats, the very real threats made by the US against the AND government that ultimately resulted
in that government collapsing, and a ruthless neoliberal dictator coming to power who literally used
to abduct people and throw them out of helicopters. That was the kind of, you know, alternative democratic
socialism versus this, like, rigid, ruthless, neoliberal authoritarianism. And obviously, given
the choice between the two, the US, the home of freedom, chooses the ruthless neoliberal authoritarianism.
Grace, I think that's another example of you tying governments to, um, multinationals again,
and if you look at what happens in South America and the, you know, right from the 1920s onwards,
American imperialism is in support of large American producers, and they're making sure that the
governments of South America are supporting the extraction from South America to America again.
So those connections are really clear in that kind of state and corporate collusion.
Yeah, absolutely. And the United Fruit Company, which I write about in Guatemala, is a really,
really good example of that.
Yeah, later in your chapter, you, you, sorry, that you lament that as long as capital controls
the means of production, it will also control the technological development of society,
which will constrain our ability to imagine new ways of organising society.
In light of this, what gives you hope that this can change, Grace?
Yes, this point about technology is really important. And it's a point that Marx makes
in the Grundrisse, um, when he talks about how capitalist society is the only societies where
innovation and technological development becomes a kind of business in itself. Um, and that business
is really oriented towards producing technologies and products that are going to have profitable
outlets. So, you know, we end up like using so many of our collective resources to create crypto currencies,
and like these massive social media platforms that have no discernible social use, um, but which,
you know, eat up a ton of our resources and create huge profits for certain people. Um, you know,
you can just imagine the kind of society that we'd be living in if technological, um, development had
been oriented around social use rather than profit, it would be a completely different world. Um,
the issue is, is that, yeah, you know, the capitalists control, um, it's, you know, this,
this, uh, fusion between public and private power between capital and the states controls the direction
of technological innovation. So it's generally kind of state, uh, armies and militaries and defence
departments that invest in, in, um, research and development and then big kind of private corporations.
And, you know, you can see this today with like Elon Musk trying to get to Mars to escape a dying planet.
Um, so bringing technological development and innovation under democratic control would be
like a massive step, um, towards, you know, building a different kind of economy. Um, and I look in the
book at like a number of different ways that you can do that. So, um, I think like some of the ideas
that Marianna Mazzucato, for example, has in her book, which looks at this are really good. Like,
I'm a bit more skeptical about the potential to just get the state to do good things. You have to
build power, to force politicians, to do things differently.
This, this is Marianna Mazzucato's idea of a mission economy, isn't it?
Exactly. Yeah. Um, which I think, you know, that could be good if it was driven by the right power
dynamics. So you have to start by like building a base to demand a shift towards a democratic economy
first. Um, but you know, the whole idea of the mission economy, I think works alongside, uh, measures
to kind of democratize finance and investment, uh, which I also talk about in the book. So like having
a kind of democratic national investment bank and kind of people's asset manager, that sort of thing
that could put the funding behind, um, different kinds of technological innovation. And the idea
ultimately I think is, you know, there are lots of discussions as to whether you can have a truly
kind of democratic economy, um, because it relies on a lot of kind of human decision-making as opposed
to the kind of elegant hands-off decentralized approach of the market. But there is an argument to
suggest that with the right kinds of technology, you can actually build an efficient and effective
democratic economy. Um, it would just require that we were looking to develop very different
kinds of technologies, right? It would require a lot of, uh, focus on that particular area.
Um, so that potentially puts in place the technological foundations for a transition to socialism,
basically, uh, but it requires a lot of building power in the here and now to even begin to think
about what that might look like. Fantastic. And I think it's great to have a Marxist book doing so well
and knowing that so many people.
