Welcome everyone to another Silk Road seminar, but looking forward to this for quite some time.
This has been quite a bit of time in the making. There was a connection with Dr. Andani not that
long ago, but it was in COVID and then things sort of did what happened in COVID and then
reached out again. And I'm just so happy you're here. So Khalil reached out to me because he said
he comes from an Islamic tradition in which Neoplatonism plays a very prominent role.
And I thought that's very important and appropriate for the philosophical Silk Road
because I've been exploring the possibilities in which Neoplatonism can form a philosophical
Silk Road between Christianity, Judaism and Islam. And so that is at least the initial place from
where we will begin our conversation. But first, Khalil, could you could you just introduce
yourself and tell us a little bit about yourself and why you reached out to me and so forth?
Sure. So my name is Khalil Andani. I'm actually from Canada, grew up in Toronto,
and after a short career as an accountant, I decided to switch and pursue my passion,
which was the study of religious thought. And academically, I'm trained in Islamic studies,
namely the intellectual history of Islam. And anyone who studies the intellectual history
of Islam will run into this sort of family of Islamic thought, which I call Islamic Neoplatonism.
Right. Right. And there are multiple traditions in Islam that are Neoplatonic,
that have taken inspiration from Neoplatonic writers translated into Arabic.
So one of the traditions I specialize in, in studying academically, historically is the Ismaili tradition,
which is also the tradition that I come from myself. And I, part of my research, doctoral research and
related research, I found myself having to read Muslim Neoplatonic texts, like very, very closely,
just to even understand what is being said and what is the worldview of so many Muslim thinkers.
And, and the popularity of Neoplatonism and Islam, it's one of those things that transcends sectarian
division. Right. So once you tap into it, you now have the ability to understand the worldview of a
Muslim thinker, whether he's Sunni or whether he's Shi'i or whether he's Sufi or whether he's a
peripatetic philosopher and so on. And through my, you know, decade or over a decade of research,
I found that actually Neoplatonism as a worldview is a very viable project, especially today, both
from a Muslim perspective, that is, I am of the view that if one really wants to make sense of Islamic
theology, belief and practice, having a Neoplatonic worldview underpinning one's Islamic faith is very,
very valuable, both at the level of practice, i.e. Have you ever wondered like, well, why do,
why do Muslims pray? And why do Muslims pray the way they do? Right? What is the point of all this?
Why all these gestures? So one way of intellectually, you know, strengthening one's
spiritual life, in my opinion, is to hold a Neoplatonic worldview. The other side that I saw
of this is today, and I'm sure you've been privy to this, there are many theological interfaith discussions,
philosophical discussions among people about viable models of God, viable models of the God-world
relationship, viable solutions to the problem of evil, for example, suffering, all these things.
And I found that at an intellectual level, Neoplatonism has some of the best answers
to these questions, whether one is a Muslim, or whether one is a Jew, or a Christian, or you know,
even like a Hindu, like the Neoplatonic model has resources that actually address, in my opinion,
anyway, many of the problems raised in the philosophy of religion. So I found it very
intellectually compelling. So many, many years ago, I thought to myself that, in addition to
the historical work that I'll always be doing as an academic and as an assistant professor of religion,
it was also going to be an individual project of my own to revive Neoplatonism as a form of thought.
And that is around when I sort of stumbled upon your work. It was actually one of some of the people
that interviewed you, Sam Tideman. I don't know if you remember from the channel. He pointed me in
your direction. He said, Oh, you really need to talk to John, you know, and you guys would have a great
time. So I've been inspired by seeing this, the conversations you've had, especially because you
approach this from a different perspective, like I approach this primarily from a metaphysical,
theological perspective, you're approaching it from this more cognitive perspective, which is very much
part of the tradition. So I thought it was an opportunity to dialogue with you and learn sort of
a different route through this tradition. And I mean, I just published something and there was a great
quote from, I forgot the name of the author, but a great author said that Neoplatonism is one of the
most enduring yet understudied intellectual traditions in the entire history of philosophy. So I'm very
excited to partake in this dialogue with you. That's fantastic, Khalil. I mean, this is, I mean, you're
bearing witness to something that I've been arguing for, which is this tremendous capacity for Neoplatonism
to weave itself through multiple religious traditions. And then also, as you pointed out with my own work,
the work in 40 cognitive science, the recent work on biology, especially the work on Michael Levin,
some work in physics, like Wolfgang Smith's work, all this stuff keep converging back towards
a Neoplatonic view. And then, of course, there's been the recent resurgence of work in Neoplatonism,
especially recapturing some of its phenomenological aspects. So it doesn't come off as just this dry
intellectual propositional affair, but is actually a living tradition. And I guess maybe that's where I
want to start first with you. There's so much I want to talk to you about because there's so many
connections here. But you said that Neoplatonism, in some sense, empowers or affords or enhances
your personal practice, your religious practice, your spiritual practice. Could you tell me a little
bit more about that? Like, what does that for it? So one question I might have is, are there practices
that are that were like Islamic and then have been reformed or transformed by Neoplatonism? Or have
you found that there are some practices from the Neoplatonic heritage that you've brought into Islam
and they're homed well there? There's there's there's a couple different things that you could
have meant. So what do you mean there? Sure, I'll give you some examples. So generally what I've seen
happen by certain Islamic traditions is they have Neoplatonized Islamic practices and in doing so
they Islamicize Neoplatonism. So that's like the big picture, but let me give you some examples. So
we have until today a number of Islamic traditions of belief and practice that adhere to a Neoplatonic
worldview, which and then that worldview looks very similar to the framework first put forth by
Plotinus. Right, right. Right. And then, as you know, Plotinus' model, which I call the standard model,
did get modified by Proclus and the High Amplicus. It becomes a little more fat in a sense. So in you
see the Islamic traditions doing the same thing. So if I were to generalize, I would say that today,
there are at least four, at least, so there could be more, but there are at least four Islamic traditions
that continue to be Neoplatonic. Could you name them, please?
Could you name them, please? Yes. Yeah. So the first would be the Ismaili tradition. That's the tradition
that I belong to. So very quickly, Ismailis are a Shia denomination of Islam who believe in the
spiritual authority of a lineage of Imams, spiritual leaders directly descended from Prophet Muhammad.
And if you were watching the news in the last couple of months, the 49th Imam of the Ismailis,
Aga Khan IV, passed away recently in February. I don't know if you know, he received the honorary
degrees at University of Toronto. Oh, I didn't know that. Yeah. And his son, the 50th Imam, just succeeded.
So that tradition, the Ismaili tradition, which today is very publicly known for its
humanitarian work. But this is a Neoplatonic tradition, one of the earliest in Islam. So
Neoplatonism as a worldview has actually continued within the Ismaili tradition,
which is to say, the terminology, the doctrine that Ismaili is still believe in today, make reference
to, for example, the intellect, the news. Ismaili still refer to that, but they use a more,
you could say, indigenous term, like instead of saying the word news, if you go to Ismaili and you say,
do you believe in the news? They might not know what you mean. But if you say, do you believe in the
light or the Arabic word noor? Do you believe in the noor? They'll be like, oh yeah, absolutely.
You know, and, and if you ask Ismaili Muslims today, like, what is the goal of your spiritual
life or your prayer life? They'll answer something like it's to become closer and attain union with
the light. Now that light in Ismaili texts is often described as the Neoplatonic intellect.
It's often called the first intellect, the universal intellect, this sort of thing.
So what Ismaili philosophers used to do back, you know, a thousand years ago,
a hundred, even just hundreds of years ago is when they would explain the meaning of Islamic prayers.
I'll use something very simple. Muslim prayers have many gestures within them. Right. And, and if you
watch the news, you'll see this. So if you see a clip of Muslims praying, one type of gesture is a bowing.
Yes. This is like where you're bowing, but you're not fully on the ground. Right. And then the second
gesture is called a prostration where like your head touches the ground. So there's bowing, which
you technically called genuflection, but I'll call it bowing and there's prostration. So in a smiley
text from a thousand years ago, uh, which I've published and written on explains, uh, the inner
meaning of prayer. And what they say is they, and the author's name is Nasir Khosrow. And again,
I've published on this, so it's on my academia. He explains that when the worshiper goes into a bowing
position and recites a particular name of God, and that the Arabic, the recitation has a particular
divine name, Al-Azim, which means the great, um, the worshiper should realize that symbolically
the act of bowing and reciting the divine name Al-Azim refers to the universal soul.
I see the world soul. So you're supposed to think of the world soul when you bow.
Oh, wow.
Right. And then it goes on when the worshiper goes into a full prostration. Now the head is
touching the ground and they recite another name of God, which is the name means the most high. The
name is Al-Azim, the most high. That divine name refers to the intellect
and the act of fully prostrating means the worshiper symbolically unites with the intellect.
I see. Is there anything that it corresponds to the one, um, or relationship to the one?
Yes, uh, there are, but remember, um, in, in many Islamic traditions who hold to Neoplatonism,
right? And similar to Plotinus, the one is beyond predication. Right, right, right, right.
So then you have to be careful, uh, when you're like, when you're looking at divine names that one
recites that a person recites, uh, in truth, the, the divine names all fall short of the one.
Of course. I mean, that's very standard. What I meant is there, is there a practice in which someone
like Plotinus might realize henosis, that state of at-one-ment? Is that something that is acknowledged
or sought after within your tradition? That is, that is unity with the one? Yes.
Uh, that is, that is acknowledged. Uh, so there are a smiley text of, for example, uh, Nasir Dintusi,
great Islamic philosopher, astronomer. He wrote a text, um, outlining the different levels
toward unity with the one. And he does talk about how, uh, at the level of the one,
there's, there's no worshiper and there's no worship. Of course. There's no subject. There's
no object. Like the worshiper at the level of the one to have that experience has to negate
himself or herself. Like you, you can't exist because at the one, there's only the one.
So you do have, this is talked about, uh, but at a more mundane level, I'll give you an example
where reference is made to the one. So, um, when the way most Muslims pray, they begin their prayer
by saying Allahu Akbar. Uh, again, sadly, uh, the media due to the news, that term now gets
associated with negative things, but Allahu Akbar is how most Muslims begin a prayer. Now, what does
that phrase mean? It, it just means God is greater and Ismaili texts interpret that as a reference to
the one. Right. Right. Right. Right. The one is greater than all description. The one is greater
than all predicates. So when you say Allahu Akbar, you're referring to the one in like one of the only
ways that you could refer to the one. So this is just the Ismaili tradition, but you know, there are
like, we, in addition to the Ismailis, we have Sufis. Yes. So the Sufi tradition of, uh, associated
with Ibn Arabi and a whole bunch of, uh, commentators of the Arabi that is neoplatonic. Yes. You know,
um, the 12 or Shia. So this is another Shia group. Um, majority of Iranians, for example,
are 12 or Shia, half of Iraqis are 12 or Shia, good number of Lebanese, good number of South Asians.
And they're the largest Shia, uh, denomination today. Uh, much of the 12 or Shia tradition is
neoplatonic. So if you pick up a text by a 12 or scholar, even living today there, they'll like go on
and out, they'll talk about the one and they'll talk about the intellect and the soul. So that
tradition is neoplatonic as well. Uh, and then you also have, uh, uh, today, I don't know how many
these people there are, but there are Muslims who continue to follow Avicenna really with Avicenna.
Yeah. Uh, I, I can't tell like, they're not a community per se, but there are thinkers within
different communities who still follow Ibn Sina's understanding. Uh, and that is also neoplatonic.
Yes. Yes. Tradition. Uh, and then we also have, uh, again, I don't, I don't know if they're a
community, but there are people who follow Suhra Hwardi. Well, yeah, yeah, yes. Yeah. Yeah. He's
one of the people I'm going to be meeting on the philosophical Silk Road. Uh, the philosophy of
illumination. So these traditions exist, uh, and people like, so you still have Muslims, myself included,
who have in mind a neoplatonic orientation when we practice our faith and whose communities,
even when they're not, even when a community member is, is not learned in the tradition,
they're still using vocabulary, right? Like newer or light or, you know, uh, God or the one, uh, I mean,
a very basic example, all Muslims, when they pray, recite a particular chapter of the Quran,
chapter 112 called Surat Al-Ikhlas. Uh, anyone who reads Surat Al-Ikhlas, even in English
will be struck at how neoplatonic it is. So in English, it says, say, he is God,
the absolute one. Oh, wow. God is independent or undivided. He did not beget,
nor was he begotten. And there is nothing like him, right? That's what it says.
It's very easy to read this and say, well, this is talking about the one. In fact,
professor Juan Cole, uh, who's an expert on Islam and late antiquity, uh, in his book, uh, and some of
his articles, he's basically said that this surah of the Quran encapsulates Plotinus's teaching on the
one. So, so, so, uh, what, what does, well, first of all, uh, there's two things I want to ask you.
This is very, you're really sparking my interest a lot. Uh, one is, uh, I'll say them both. And so
I don't forget them. Uh, uh, one is, are there practices analogous to like the contemplative
practices that were predominant in Greek Neoplatonism? Um, and of course there was also
rituals, uh, there was theurgia, there was, uh, there, there, there's also, so there's theoria,
uh, theurgia, and then there's, you know, the, the possibility of theosis, things like that. Um,
is there, are there contemplative practices are that go, uh, with these traditions that
are recognizably similar to those practiced by the pagan Neoplatonists or, uh, uh, in,
and then the second question is as, as somebody who's obviously training themselves and, you know,
to step back and reflect on this from a wider intellectual framework, you're an academic,
right? What, but, but, so you're both in and outside, which is great, right? I think that's
really important. Uh, you're both within interest in tradition, but in your scholastic tradition,
you're also outside, right? Trying to take the stance of other people looking in. Um, what does that
say to you? Like what, like what, how, how does, how is it typically, uh, interpreted that, you know,
here's some Greeks, um, in a largely polytheistic pagan world and predating, you know, indubitably
predating, uh, Muhammad by centuries and coming up with this, what's their status and what does that
mean? Um, and so those are the two questions. The one is like, I'm trying to get a little bit more,
I understand prayer, uh, but even with, you can even see Christianity when it's touching
its own Neoplatonic tradition. And also from that talking with a Buddhist tradition, developing these,
recovering these kinds of, you know, prayers of the heart, these more meditative practices,
these more contemplative practices. So that's the practice side. And then the, the, the, the
philosophical question is what, how is that interpreted? I mean, so you could, I, so I'm,
for example, I'm looking at early Christianity right now, you know, Justin Martyr and Clement
and Origen and, and, and, you know, and there's this really tough thing going on. They're trying to
figure out how can they sort of baptize these Greeks, um, who, you know, know nothing of Christ,
as they like to say, uh, and, and, and there's this great struggle. Um, um, so, so that's just
to give you a comparison. So those are my two questions, answer whichever one you want to answer
first. Um, I mean, let's start with the second one. So, uh, I, I think that Muslims have a much easier
time, uh, looking back and adopting, uh, and affirming, uh, so-called pre-Islamic traditions
of thought because, uh, the Quran is very clear saying that God sent a messenger to every single
nation on earth. And although the Quran only names 25 messengers and there are predominantly
biblical characters, the Quran is very clear that we have sent messengers. It says that we have not
named, we have not told you about, and this explains why very early on Muslim empires and Muslim
intellectuals from the 700s onward, very freely read, uh, Judeo-Christian, Jewish Christian literature,
uh, Zoroastrian literature, Greek literature, Indian literature, and all this literature was very
quickly translated into Arabic. This was a state sponsored translation movement. Uh, so texts in,
in, um, Syriac and Greek and, and many other languages, they were very quickly translated into
Arabic and they were studied by Muslim scholars of, of all, of all types because there was already a prior,
uh, commitment to the belief that God has inspired people in the past, right? And that a true Muslim,
I mean, there was this belief that a true Muslim, especially a true Muslim leader will have mastery
over the entire heritage of human knowledge. Yeah. This is what, this is what motivated the
Abbasid caliphs and the Fatimid caliphs to, uh, maintain libraries and to sponsor scholars. It was believed that
the true Muslim leader, the true Imam of the time will have a mastery, uh, and will give people access
to the entire intellectual heritage of humankind. So there, there was always this openness. So it's
actually not very difficult as a Muslim to say, okay, the, the Greeks have divine truth or the Indians have
divine truth. And I mean, apart from, uh, from the Greeks, if you look at what, what happens in India under Muslim rule,
they translate some of the, the Sanskrit scriptures to Persian, right? I mean, like their entire books written on this. Um,
um, one of my colleagues, I believe, uh, Shankar Nair, he's a professor in the U S and he's, I think he's written
an entire book about like the, the, the, the Sanskrit to Persian translation movement. So this is not a very
difficult thing to look at also because there's been a lot of research even into, uh, what counts as paganism
exactly. Like in the Quran, you know, the Quran condemns idol worship, but a lot of studies into the Quran have found
that idol, what we call idol worship, it's not something left field. It's actually just part of the continuum of, of, of what,
what we also call monotheism. Right. Um, so those, those dividing lines are not, are, are not as big between, you know,
monotheism and paganism as, as we're told, like, especially in normative, right, normative, uh,
religious education. Now in my own tradition, the Ismaili tradition, um, it's particularly easy
because, uh, one of the Ismaili Imams, uh, Aga Khan III, who died in 1957, he's, he wrote in the 1950s,
he basically said that Socrates was a divinely inspired messenger of God.
Hmm. Wow. I didn't know that. If an Ismaili Imam said that it's a clear affirmation that now,
not just Socrates, but the Socrates tradition, which many believe goes to Plato, Aristotle,
and goes all through these commentators. This entire tradition has in a sense from an Ismaili
perspective, been sanctioned. Wow. To, to learn from. And it's not just Ismaili's. I'm sure you've
come across, there are references in other Muslim texts, Sufi texts to the divine Plato.
Yes. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. That I, that I knew about. Yeah. Yeah. So, so this is,
this is very easy from a Muslim perspective. Now, I think in the current political climate,
because of, uh, the aftermath of colonialism and occidentalization, some Muslims today are now, like,
hesitant, you know, like, Oh, well, this is foreign, but this is a very new attitude. Uh, whereas,
um, the, the standard Muslim madrasa curriculum over the past, I don't know, 400, 500.
Even more. Uh, uh, Kelly, you, you dropped out for a sec. Could you just repeat what you said?
You're about to list how long the tradition has been around.
Okay. Wait, wait a sec. Ben, I'm not hearing him.
Can you hear me now? Yeah. Now I can hear you. Yep. The sounds caught up. Okay. Start again,
please. Yeah. So, uh, just speaking of the Muslim, the Muslim engagement with Greek thought, uh, for at
least 500 years, if not more, the standard, uh, curriculum in Muslim madrasas under the, uh,
Ottoman empire, the Safavid empire, the Mughal empire, the madrasa curriculum. So like the standard
curriculum for a Muslim student included, uh, Aristotelian. And neoplatonic materials. Right.
Right. So for example, you would have to learn about the 10 Aristotelian categories.
Like that was just part of your education. Um, many people would read, uh, a neoplatonic text
about the one and 10 intellects, for example. Um, this is a book called Hidayat al-Hikmah by Abhari.
Like this was just part of the education in the past. So now this is, this is over by the way. Okay.
Like they don't learn this anymore. Um, but they, but they did now, now let's move to your, your second
question, right. Was about, uh, practices. So to be fair, I'm not an expert in the Greek
neoplatonic practices. I don't know the details of that. What I can tell you is, um, I'm not aware
of Muslims directly incorporating a Greek, uh, theoric or theurgic practice into Islam. But what
I am aware of is, uh, indigenous Islamic practices that get interpreted within that lens. So let's
take in Sufism as well as in, I would say all Muslims have this tradition of chanting the divine names.
Right. It's called zikr or zikr. Uh, you chant the divine name, either you chant it, uh, silently or
you might chant it aloud. Now, here's the thing. What names do you chant? Well, if you have a spiritual
guide, like a Sufi teacher or an Ismaili Imam, the spiritual guide will assign a particular name or names
to the disciple. Right. Uh, why those names? Well, there's this idea that each divine name refers to
one of the neoplatonic hypothesis or refers to a particular aspect of one hypothesis.
Yes. And the idea is when you chant that divine name, you internalize the divine name. So that divine
name sort of becomes part of yourself. And in doing so, the divine name opens up this connection
between your soul and your intellect and the universal soul and the universal intellect.
Right. Yeah. Yeah. Right. And the divine name, as you know, uh, if you're a neoplatonist, um, you cannot
look at petitionary prayer the way that your, your neighbor does. Right. So, you know, when, when most
people were taught to pray, you know, even in our communities, uh, you're taught, okay, if you, if you really
have this need, you know, ask God. And if you pray really hard, God will be convinced to, to do something
different. Uh, and if you're in certain traditions, uh, this is true in Catholicism, Orthodoxy,
Shia Islam, Sufi Islam, you'll also be taught to pray to a saint. Right. Uh, now the standard view
is God can be moved by your prayer. Right. And if you pray to a saint or a prophet or an imam,
they'll pray to God for you and their prayer will move God. And then God will intervene. Like,
this is sort of like the children's understanding and the mass understanding, but wait, if you're
a neoplatonist like us, that belief doesn't make any sense. That's right. That's right. Because
a, the one does not change. Like the one is immutable. Furthermore, the noose doesn't change either.
And the soul, the world soul is also not like it's dynamic, but it's not changing in this discrete
manner. So you have to now reinterpret what prayer is, or rather correctly interpret what prayer is.
And, and, and this is something that again, the pre-modern authors already believe this,
but I found it worthwhile to write an entire essay, um, to explain this to people. So now what does prayer
do? Well, now prayer, and this is very similar to the concept behind neoplatonic theology, right?
Yes. Prayer does not affect the one, the intellect or the soul, the world soul. What does it affect?
It affects us. So if I pray for myself, the strength of my prayer, all the energy I put into my prayer,
it acts on me. Like it makes myself more receptive to receiving the emanation that's coming from the one
through the intellect and the soul. Like that's what prayer does for me, but wait,
I can also pray for others and others can pray for me. So if I appeal to, uh, the prophet Muhammad,
many Muslims will, I'm putting it in quotes, pray to the prophet Muhammad in the sense that they'll ask
prophet Muhammad for something. Um, many Muslims will pray to the Imams like prophet Muhammad's cousin,
Ali, um, Shia Muslims pray to their Imams. Ismaili Muslims, we pray to our Imams. Again,
I'm using the word pray in quotes in the English sense of to make an appeal to, not in the sense of
worship. Right. So it's my leaves and 12 or Shia. They'll say, yeah, Ali mother. Oh, Ali help.
Like talking, they're talking to their Imam, the first Imam, uh, Sunnis might say, yeah, Muhammad,
or they might pray to a saint. So now neoplatonically, this makes sense. But in this particular way,
when you pray to an intermediary, it could be a prophet, an Imam, a saint, it could be Jesus,
it could be Mary, right? You're not asking the intermediary to convince God to do something
because God is unchanging. So what are you really doing? Well, you're asking the intermediary
to pray for you. And that intermediary as a soul is believed to be a living presence within the
neoplatonic cosmos. So that intermediary, let's say it's the prophet Muhammad. He is aware of your,
your call for help and the prophet prays for you. And what the prophet's prayer does is it makes you
more receptive. Right. Right. Right. So in that sense, the intermediary in a, in a literal sense,
mediates the emanations that come from the one that fall upon the intermediary soul and the intermediary,
his prayer or her prayer opens up your soul to receiving those emanations.
Yeah. This is very similar to the neoplatonic interpretation of theurgia and prayer. It's very,
very similar. So, so that's, that's very interesting. I mean, I mean, I'm really glad I'm talking to you
about this, how vibrant it is. It's, it's, it's, it's astonishing how similar neoplatonism is within
Eastern Orthodoxy, especially in the names of God in Dionysus. And you're invoking the names of God,
and you have, you've got a reinterpretation of theurgia and of theoria and there's very similar
moves going on. And again, that, that, that, that leads me to my next question, which is more of a
philosophical question than a doctrinal question, which is like, what's going on here? What, why are
these different things from, you know, presumably some very different presuppositions, historical,
cultural context? Why do you think they're converging on this? Why do they keep coming to this? And then they
keep doing the same kind of things to get it to fit where they came from. Did that make sense as a
question? Do you know what I, what I, what I'm trying to say? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I've heard you say,
and I'm in agreement with this, and I've said this as well, that, um, neoplatonism to me seems like
the metaphysical theory of everything. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Right. And it does seem like that now to your
question, why do so many traditions like different religious traditions seem to converge on this
metaphysical template? Uh, you know, there'll be two answers, right? The historian in me,
uh, at the level of historicism, I will try to give you a historical account of the transmission of
ideas, which as you know, in academia, everybody loves to do this, right? Like you can make your
entire career arguing for idea transmission, like somehow ideas are in the air, like, like a virus and
everybody just picks them up. I mean, it's a very common thing. And, and I've written articles
making such claims, you know, this person gets it from this person. And I'm sure that that is going
on. Like, I'm sure that is going on. However, uh, personally, I find that explanation, although true
at its own level, it's still limited. And, uh, my own view, uh, not as an academic, because I can't
prove this academically, but as a philosopher and as a metaphysician is, I think the reason why we have
convergence is because at the end of the day, reality is one and truth is one. And I believe
that every religious tradition, which contains seekers of truth, who are wayfaring on this, I
believe everybody is, is arriving at the same destination through, of course, mediated through
their own practices, through their own vocabulary, through their own dogmas. But because reality is
objective, at the end of the day, and I believe reality is objective, not necessarily physical reality,
but reality. Uh, so if reality is objective, then there are objective truths that many people within
many traditions are going to arrive at. Uh, almost like we're all spiritual scientists with very limited
equipment, uh, discovering, uh, discovering like the same plane of reality. And then our, our interpretive
mechanisms, uh, allow us to describe this in, in a very limited way, but even the limited descriptions
will see this convergence. So when I, um, you know, a long time ago, I wrote an article comparing Meister
Eckhart's view of the Trinity to the Ismaili Neoplatonists, for example. Um, and, but, but I,
I had also read some of the, uh, perennialists and I'm not a full perennialist. I can say I'm a soft
perennialist. Um, but you could find a metaphysical template, not just between, let's say the Trinity and
the, the Neoplatonic triad, but also you look in Taoism, you can find something there with, uh, with
Wu Chi and, uh, Tai Chi. So like, you know, the, the Taoists have this idea of the one, like the ineffable
one. Uh, I, I've been a, a practicer of Tai Chi, a player of Tai Chi Chuan for over three decades. Uh,
yes. So, so if you read, I'm sure if you read, uh, René Lenon's book, The Great Triad, um, he talks
about the metaphysical triads in Taoism. It's in it, it's very similar to the Neoplatonic triad.
Very, very similar. Uh, in Hinduism, you'll find these ideas as well. Uh, you have Purusha and
Prakriti, for example, in, in one, one sort of Hindu metaphysical tradition, or you have Vishnu and
Brahma, like the Vishnu and Brahma very much look like the intellect and the soul. So I do believe that
this convergence is not just due to historic historical transmission, although that, that
definitely is happening. I think it's because we are converging on the same reality.
So, uh, uh, just to first, uh, amplify that a little bit and then come back to a question.
Um, so there's now what's called the platonic representation hypothesis within work and machine
learning, which is, you can take various AIs with different architecture, start with different kinds
of initial data sets, even have different objectives. But if you make them complex and
rich enough, they converge on the same sort of, uh, ontology. They, they come and the idea here is
what's going on there. And it's something like reality itself starts to constrain,
right. Uh, uh, uh, the, the representational structure.
Um, and it's called the platonic representation hypothesis for an obvious reason. It's the idea
that there is the, there are these paradigmatic patterns that constitute intelligibility and
realness. Um, I thought that's, that that's really interesting, uh, just to, uh, to add that in.
It's an, it's, it's what I mean is you making what's called a convergence argument. I like you,
I acknowledge the historical diffusion, but there seems to be a convergence above and beyond
what can be accounted for well by, uh, the diffusion. And there's no historical diffusion
going on in the machine learning. So that really buttresses the idea. Now there's something going on
that's driving the conversion out convergence outside of, you know, historical diffusion.
So I thought I'd, I just buttress your, your, your argument with some, uh, more, more recent evidence.
Now, an interesting question there is like, what is the nature of that constraint?
And then you said objective, but you said not necessarily physical. That's interesting
because there's three possible ways in which people have one is you could be a union and say,
well, that's because the psyche hat, you know, which is basically a Kantian thing.
The psyche has this kind of structure and therefore wherever there are human beings,
they will impose this kind of structure because that's the structure of, you know, that's the structure
that the, the mind imposes on the world in order to make human sense of it, sort of a Kant union answer.
There's the platonic answer, which is, uh, well, no, no, there, there are, there's an organization,
an intrinsic organization to intelligibility that constrains, um, what can be known and
how it can be known. And that's kind of a platonic realism. That's not, I get it. That's, I'm not,
I'm not attributing to you a sort of a, uh, you know, a simple reductionism or a simple physicalism or
anything like that. And then there's another one, which, um, you know, um, um, uh, you, you,
you have in certain kinds of traditions where you have sort of a dialogical idea that there's a
synergistic relationship between the grammar of the human mind and the grammar of reality. And that
in like, to use William Desmond language in that between, in that Metaxu, another platonic term,
right. That is where, right. They're both co-contributing to why this kind of structure
of intelligibility keeps emerging. And I think you can make a good case, uh, for all of these
coming out of the platonic tradition. Jung is basically the Plato of the psyche, um, in a lot
of ways, and then you have sort of a classic standard plate plate plate, a platonic realism.
And then you have this more recent, right. Um, well, it's metaxological, the idea that it's
co-created, which lines up really nicely with a lot of four E cogsci, uh, the kind of cogsci.
So what do you think about those three options and, uh, what, like where, where might you land
on them or are you sort of open or agnostic or what do you think? Um, I would say that I would
probably land on the third. If, if those are, if that's, what's on the tray, uh, the, here's why
I would say that again, this is just on first blush. Um, you know, as you know, uh, some kind of
Platonism is becoming more popular, especially among people who study math and computer science.
Yeah, it's very much very much biology. Now the new biology work of Michael Levin
is thoroughly neoplatonic and in a rigorous, very rigorous fashion. Yeah, very much.
I, I, what I just find is I, without denying Jungian archetypes, I don't, I don't, I don't feel
like I'm in a place to really say that's wrong. You know, um, I don't study, uh, psychology, but, um,
even if you just take it as is, and then on the other hand, if this sort of modern type of Platonism,
Platonic realism, which posits a sort of Platonic realm, um, where you have like the objectivity
of mathematics and, and other such things. Right. Um, my only issue with those versus
neoplatonism is that I just don't think they, they, they explain enough of what we need to explain.
So generally I would say that there's at least three facets of the world as we experience it that need
to be explained by a worldview. Um, the first is existence. Like the exist, the sheer existence
of, of anything requires an explanation without accounting for, uh, whether it's a, a cat or a
dog or a star, but just the fact that anything exists that requires an explanation, the existence,
the sheer existence of things. And that explanation is only the one, only the one,
an absolutely simple, independent, unconditioned reality. Only that can explain the existence of any
kind of reality. Right. Right. Well, the reason I brought, oh, so go ahead, finish your thoughts.
Yeah. So that's just the first thing that needs to be explained existence. Right. Because, and, and,
you know, you, you arrive at that question subjectively, like when we ask, well, I exist. So
think about it from our perspective, um, like Descartes, you can deny, you can deny the physical
world. You can deny, you can even doubt your own thoughts, right? You, you, you know, you, you might
doubt the existence of yourself, although Descartes won't, um, he'll, he'll affirm it. But even if you
did, you know what you can't doubt that there is existence. You can't doubt that. Even if you doubt
your existence, there's still existence in general, that's being affirmed. So that, that, that's the
first question. Why is there existence? And the answer to that is the Neoplatonic one. And there's
no other, this is just my opinion, of course. And, and many will, many will disagree with me. I have many
friends, uh, colleagues in the philosophy of religion who are not Neoplatonist at all. And I, I, I debate
them for fun, you know, collegiate, we have debates about this. So many people say,
no, but I'll say, look, in my view, where I stand, only the one can explain existence.
Uh, a, a, a personal God who is metaphysically complex is not the one.
Yes, I agree with that. And I think that's important. I, you know, and you have Spinoza's
argument and I, I tend to think I'm, I belong to the camp that sees Spinoza in the line of Neoplatonism,
which is, which is a growing camp that it makes no sense to talk about more than one ultimate
reality that, that, that is, that make that's, that is an utter oxymoronic absurdity. So you have
to do that. I, I, I, so it's not just an existence argument. It's kind of like, um, cause the, the
problem with the exist, the problem I have with existence is sort of classic Kantian arguments.
Existence isn't a predicate. I know what you mean. Uh, but the thing that is a predicate is,
is realness, but realness, realness ultimately points us towards an ultimate reality because,
and there can't be more than one of those or something like that. That would be my sort of,
uh, uh, version of your argument.
And not only, I mean, uh, there can only be one ultimate reality and it has to be simple.
It cannot, it has to, yeah. So the language I use is, it has to be absolutely non-dual,
which means it is the relation underneath all possible dichotomies of thought.
Correct. Yeah. Yeah. So this reality, you could say non-dual that I'm using this
more scholastic term simple, but we're saying the same thing. So there are no distinctions within
the one, uh, there's not even the distinction of subject and object. Right. And this is where,
as you know, Plotinus takes a different, uh, uh, uh, he takes issue with Aristotle.
Yes. Aristotle's a supreme principle is a self-thinking thinker, uh, in which case you
still have a sort of a duality between the thinker and, and, and which is one of the problems. Yes.
It's one of the problems, as you said, with the personal, uh, metaphysically complex God. I think
that, that that's, that I think there's a, that's a very important point. Um, so, so that explains
existence, or if I want to be more precise, the one explains the, the
fact of, uh, dependent realities. Like why are there any dependent realities at all? It's because
of the one, but yeah, the reason why I, I was, uh, uh, I was not trying to replace, I was trying to,
um, add to simplicity, non-dualities. And you see this worry in Plotinus because when people hear
simple, they think the numerical simplicity, they think, they think singleness and the one is not
singleness that, so it's not that sense of simplicity. And it's also not, it's not, it's,
it's not sort of a homogeneous in it because it, it overflows into everything else. Um,
um, that, that's why I was trying to emphasize, I want to bring out the fact that it's not,
it's not a homogeneous or a singleness that is being pointed to with this notion.
Yeah. So, so that, that explains existence or dependent realities, but what we still need more
to do, right? So my problem with a lot of today's natural theology is they'll run like one argument
and like a contingency argument, which is similar to what we're saying. And then they'll be like,
okay, I'm done. Like, let's go home. Like we did everything, but like, that's not a complete
intellectual project because, you know, we still need to explain intelligibility.
Yes, exactly. Because existence not only is here, it's intelligible to us.
And, and the deep profound primordial presupposition that there is some
non-numerical, non-logical unity between intelligibility and realness,
because if that is not the case, then we are suck. We are, we are worse than Descartes in his
worst nightmare. Yes. Yeah. So now we, to explain intelligibility,
what do we mean by that? Well, the, the intelligibility of any existence,
like, why is it intelligible? Why is it intelligible at all? Well, that there's two
things to explain the intelligibility of the objects and also the intelligibility of the
subject, right? Like, why do we even, why, why do we have this capacity to intellect in the first
place? Why does this even exist? Right. And then why is there something to be intellected?
And then if people, you know, don't like that, or they want to attribute that to something else,
I often say, well, there are a number of eternal necessary truths that are, they're just intelligible
in themselves. Like, even if the universe didn't exist, I would argue, logical truths would still
exist. The laws of logic would still exist. Mathematical objects, mathematical truths would
still exist. There's even some good, there's some good articles where if you just sit down and think
for, think about it for about an hour, you could sort of list off a lot of eternal, eternal, what they
call eternal truths, basically, like negation and affirmation, you know, truths about math, universal
circularity, even moral truths, even like, if you believe in some, not all, but you believe some truths
are like, eternally true regarding morals. Those need explanation, right? And your point is, they're not
atomic with respect to each other. Their individual intelligibility is nested within a whole, like,
they all are woven together in some profound way. Yeah, because all these eternal truths,
they're, they're all related to each other, that you could even build them out from a tree,
even. So what, so the second thing is, okay, how do we explain the very existence of eternal truths
and general intelligibility? Now, here's the thing, the Thomists, who I'm sure you've had some
interactions with, what the Thomists like to do, and they're not just them, a lot of theists,
monotheists, what they will do is, they will appeal to the one or God, to be the explanation
of intelligibility and eternal truth. And what they'll do is, they'll take the eternal truths,
and they'll put them in. There are ideas in the mind of God. But this is very problematic, right?
And you get even standard theologians like Craig saying, wait, if they're eternal and necessary,
they can't be contingently existing thoughts or ideas in the mind of God. If God is free,
as a free cognitive agent thinking them, then they're not eternal. And if they're eternal,
they do not need to be thought in order to exist. Yes, I find that argument very powerful, by the way.
So from a Neoplatonist, the only problem a Neoplatonist would have with putting them in God is it
renders God internally complex. It makes the one eternally complex, right? The one cannot be constituted
by some number of eternal thoughts or ideas, nor can the one be the direct source
of a direct multiplicity of eternal thoughts or ideas that would also render the one internally
complex. So the move that Plotinus makes, and we all after him, we make the same move. Although nobody in
the philosophy of religion like today's journals is doing this for whatever reason, but we're going to do
it is we say, okay, there are eternal ideas. They do require an eternal mind or an eternal intellect
to sustain them and to think them. But that eternal intellect is not the one. That eternal intellect
is the Neoplatonist. Because the Neoplatonist is singular in its being, but internally it has
complexity. And that is what guarantees the intelligibility of anything, the intelligibility
of eternal truth. And then it's very simple. The Neoplatonist cannot be part of the one because the one
is simple, non-dual. So the only thing, the only way the Neoplatonist, which is must be eternal, the
only way the Neoplatonist can be related to the one is if it is dependent on the one, but not part of the
one and not inside the one. And that's how you establish the Neoplatonist. Yeah, I think that's right.
The dependency is very tricky, like I said, because you don't want eternal truths
causally dependent on the one because that makes them ultimately contingent, right? And then they
lose their defining feature being necessary. And this is the problem of the emanation of the one
into the noose, which is a besetting problem. And I consider myself a Neoplatonist, so I'm not
casting stones, right? Is like, how, what does that emanation look like? And it doesn't look like any
model of causation because it, like the dependencies of eternal truths can't be any kind of contingent
dependencies. They have to be necessary. And so there's some necessary relationship,
but it's completely asymmetrical. The one is not necessary.
But that's totally fine. You know, in Islamic Neoplatonism, all of us quite vocally say that
the one emanates or originates or causes the intellect out of the necessity of its own nature.
And this is, yeah, that's totally fine.
And I agree. Now, that brings up two contrasts, right? Before we get to the third,
because you're going to move into the world soul, but before you do, which is, this stands against,
you know, a sort of standard Christian idea of creation ex nihilo, which depends on nothing other
than God's fiat, God's pure freedom of choice. And not constrained by even by any kind of rationality
or anything. And, and, and, and so there's that. But on the other hand, what is the status of the
noose? Is it divine? Okay. Well, a couple of things. So this depends on your definition of divine.
Yeah. Right. Uh, if divine simply means, uh, that which is above the natural world and exercises power
over the natural world, then, uh, the noose is divine. So the, I'm going to call it the intellect.
So the intellect is divine and the world soul is divine. And the one is divine. If that, if that's,
if all that divinity means like being supernatural and having causal power over the natural world,
then all three are divine. But, uh, if divine with a capital D means independent and unconditioned,
which is how Muslims use the term divine, then only the one is divine and the intellect and the soul
are eternal creations of the one. And this is definitely how Muslims saw it. So Muslims who believe
in Neoplatonism, they never found the idea of an eternal intellect or an eternal soul to be a threat
to God's divinity. Like, like it was just not an issue for us. Uh, even when we say that the one
necessarily emanates the intellect, even that we did not see that, or we do not see that as a threat
to the aseity or the, uh, quote unquote freedom of the one. And, uh, if you're interested in that,
I've written an article. This is my first like philosophy article. Cause again, I'm a historian
by profession. Um, my first philosophy article in the European journal of analytic philosophy
is about this precise issue. Uh, uh, does God create or originate, uh, by necessity? Uh, and if so,
um, you know, is that a problem? Is it a problem for divine freedom? Is it also a problem for the fact
that that would mean everything is ultimately necessary, right? That would mean that everything
that happens in the universe has been necessitated by its cause, which ultimately has been necessitated
by God. So a lot of, um, Western like modern day, uh, Anglo American Christians are very unhappy
with what I just said because they feel like they're not free, but these people are all, uh,
libertarians not politically, but philosophically they want libertarian freedom, uh, which actually
in what I've argued, I think I have, uh, of your worldview. So I would say that actually, uh, real
freedom, real freedom in which the agent, whoever the, whether you, me, or God, the agent must be in
complete control of its product. Like that's real freedom. And that only happens when whatever the
agent produces is in accordance with the essence of the agents. Yes, this is that's real freedom.
In my opinion, this is Frankfurt's notion of voluntary necessity, uh, uh, where the distinction
between being voluntary and being this necessary breaks down. And part of, uh, Frankfurt's argument is
this is actually a quintessential feature of reason. Uh, there's a necessity and a freedom when you,
uh, follow a great argument, uh, you're compelled, but it's not causally compulsive. Um, so it's not
mechanically deterministic in that sense. Um, but it's a deeper kind of necessity. And as we say, you know,
perhaps it's a logical necessity. Um, and I, and I think that's right. And then, uh, uh, and the,
and the point is, uh, a lot of the things we think to disclose or have the potential to disclose
something deep about reality, like reason, like love, like beauty all have these, this characteristic,
they don't, it doesn't fall cleanly onto the voluntary or necessity, the way we are typically
thinking about it. Hmm. Uh, one other thing I would mention, so that you sort of brought this
up about how the emanation of the news from the one can be a problematic. So, uh, this is something
where the, it's the Muslim Neoplatonists have made a contribution. Um, although I would argue,
and I have an unpublished paper where their solution was already prefigured by Plotinus himself.
So if we read Plotinus very carefully, um, for him, uh, the emanation of the news actually has two
stages. Yes. Uh, the fully formed news, which is, which internally is, is complex constituted by the
forms or the ideas, the fully formed news with its internal plurality doesn't come directly from the one.
Um, what comes from the one directly is a single and singular, uh, substance, which Plotinus calls
the indefinite dyad or the, uh, intelligible matter. Yeah. And then in reflecting back on its source,
it becomes the full fledged. Correct. So, so the, the, the direct emanation from the
one is actually only one thing. And in Islam, in Islamic Neoplatonism, we, we, we came up with a
term for this. It's called the rule of one. Um, the rule of one basically states that from the one,
only one comes forth. And the argument for this is that, uh, because the one is undifferentiated
unity, the direct product of the one could only be one effect.
If it were any more than one effect, if two effects or three effects or 10 effects directly proceed
from the one, it would logically entail that, uh, prior to the procession, you already have that
number within the one, because one part of the one has to give rise to one effect and that the second
effect, which is not the first, it needs to be given rise to by another part of the one and so on.
So the argument basically like a reductio, right? Once you've already established that the one is
undifferentiated unity, it logically follows that the direct product of the one can only be one thing or
one entity. So, uh, that one entity that proceeds from the one without mediation, it's not the fully
formed intellect. Uh, it is, uh, a pre-intellectual substance. Uh, we call it, uh, so theologically,
we call it the command of the one. So Ismailis, we call it the command of the one, uh, later Muslim
thinkers call it, uh, uh, contingent existence. Like it's just can pure contingent existence, uh,
without an essence yet. Uh, some people call it general existence. Some people call it, uh, the
existence that is going to be reflected and spread forth in everything else that will exist. But the
point is the direct, uh, flux out flux of the one is a unity with the potential for multiplicity,
sort of like a seed, like, like the seed of a tree, right? When the seed is a seed,
it, it doesn't have multiplicity yet. Like it's just a seed. And then through subsequent stages,
the seed will grow, uh, roots, branches, uh, leaves. So what happens then is this direct emanation from
the one directly comes forth and this emanation, uh, it thinks about itself. Yeah. There's a,
it's a ground from which there's an emergence, a turning back. Yeah. It turns back and the, the,
the first emanation looks back at the one and it says, I am not the one it realizes otherness.
It realizes duality from its perspective. Like the first emanation is not the one. So it has to
recognize and say to itself, I am not God, or I am not the one, uh, Islamically we would say that it,
it, it, it's the first, this is like reciting the shahada, like la ilaha illa, there is no God except
God, which is a way of saying, I am not God. So that's what that first emanation does. It realizes
that I am not God. And that realization, it's not a temporal realization, but it's a logical realization.
That realization, uh, grounds or gives rise to, uh, a quiddity, uh, an identity, an essence
for the, for the noose. So now subsequent to this realization, the noose has two parts. Now,
what directly emanated plus its identity essence. So now it's complex and further reflections on this
internal complexity will get you all those different, uh, eternal truths and forms, uh,
as constituting, uh, the noose. I mean, I, I, I think there's a lot in here. Uh, like you said,
this is a myth in a sense, cause it's spoken of, uh, in temporal terms and it can't be a temporal event
because then, um, it will, it will fall into deep self-contradiction. Um, and I think it has to do with
the intertwining of emergence and emanation somehow being one, but not the same. Um, and I, I, I think
that's the sort of ontological fact it's disclosing. I, I mean, um, I, the solution, I mean, uh, uh, the,
James Filler in his books talks a lot about the, uh, the, um, and some of his work, he talks about
this, uh, the sort of pure relationality of intellectual matter. It's the potential, uh, for
form, um, and it's not itself any kind of form yet. Um, and I think that's very interesting. I, I mean,
I, I, I just said what I thought was very valuable about this and deep about it. I'm not, I, I'm aware
that the tradition itself doesn't find Plotinus's solution satisfactory. And you get the continual
increase in the number of mediators to try and square this circle until by the time of Proclus.
And if you know, if you read Proclus, it's this incredibly complex system of mediators and mediation.
Um, now for, uh, I don't think we should, I'm not recommending we stop trying to intellectually probe
this, but I think there's something about this, uh, that we can't get in thought. Um, and that's what,
that's why we get the endless proliferation of, of mediators. Um, so like I said, I, I think what
Plotinus does captures something about the intertwining, the non-duality of emanation and
emergence and it's emanation all the way down and emergence all the way up as I like to say.
Um, and that there's some, there's a deep kind of continuum there. Um, and that picks up on a lot of
a lot of the continuums that are found in physics and in, in biology. Uh, but I also note the
tradition itself seems to say, don't be satisfied with that because we're not, uh, cause we keep,
we keep multiplying, uh, the mediators. Um, now, since I've turned to Plotinus, uh, to Proclus,
what do you think of Proclus' claim? And this is a little bit how I try to reconcile,
put Jung and Plotinus back together. Proclus has this claim that we can only know the one,
if we, if there is a one within us, if there's a one, if there's something wanting us, you know,
planet Plotinus does argue that what makes something real is the degree to which one.
Right. And, and Proclus says, he says, you know, we, we don't really know the one we know the one
within us, but it is, it, it participates in the one. Um, and what do you think of that?
Yeah. So I, I would generally agree. And so within the system of the neoplatonic system that I hold to,
which again, I could find in Plotinus. So Plotinus actually says that, um, the light of the one is
present in all beings. Like he, he appeals to something that's not the one, but it's not the news.
It's like the light of the one or the grace of the one, uh, the, the unity of the one has like
sort of poured forth and shines within everything. So I, I believe that's true, but what, what he's
talking about this unity of the one that's in everything or the light of the one, this is that
first emanation pre-intellect. Yeah. So I believe that. Do you think that is what is running all the
way through that? Yeah. Yeah. So, so if I give you an analogy, um, the one is like a power source.
Yeah. A power source. Uh, every hypostasis from the noose to us is a particular, uh, bulb with a
particular, uh, brightness. Okay. And a color. Uh, so you have the power source and then you have the
bulbs and all these bulbs are lit up from the power source, but what, what is running? What goes from the
power source to bulb one to the next bulb? There's some power current electricity that's running
through the whole system. That electricity is not identical to any particular bulb, but it's present
in all the bulbs and it's modulated by each bulb, depending on the power of the wattage and this sort
of thing. So in, in my neoplatonic system, that first emanation that comes forth from the one before
it realizes itself as intellect that's analogous to this electricity. So each of us, although my bulb
is way down in the hierarchy, right? Like there's so many things between the one and me yet by virtue of
that emanation or, or unity that's running through the system, I have a direct, I have a more or less
direct relationship to the one, because that power current, that's what I call a general existence,
right? That is a trace that Plotinus and the smileys and others, we call it the trace of the one,
the imprint of the one. So there's beyond my own intellect. So my intellect is a participation in the
noose. And my soul is a participation in the hypothesis soul. But beyond that, beyond my intellect,
there's this trace of the one within you and me. And that gives us this direct access to the one.
Yeah. And so your, I play with that analogy a little bit, there's the power source. And then
the noose is like the network, the grid, it's the structural layout so that like it, it conduces and
transforms it. And then the individual households, right. And then, but the households, right. They form
like a neighborhood and that's like the world soul. But, but so, but what I, what, what I'm hearing here,
and this has always been a little bit of my concern and one of the, with Plotinus and what I, what I saw
with Iamblichus and with Proclus is there is, there is an attempt to counterbalance emanation with
emergence that things are, there's also in, we see in nature, a drawing of things together,
a self-organizing, a coming into oneness, and then those coming into oneness and even understanding,
you know, I, I group all these things, I group all these things. And then I, right. And, and you see
this other movement of thought and being, which is going the other way. And, and to, and then of
course, later on with Erogena and others, you want to say, well, that's as much the one, right. As the
emanation, the, the return and the emanation are equally like the, the primary disclosures. They're not
the one, but they're the primary disclosures. Does that land well with you as well?
You know, absolutely. Because I mean, this sort of brings us to the third part, right? Like the soul
now. So the, the, the, the last thing we need to, so like the one explains existence,
uh, the noose explains intelligibility, but again, we're not done because when we look at the cosmos,
it's not just a bunch of static intelligible things. Now it flows. If everything is in motion,
I mean, even a, you know, in physics now, not, there's not one static moment like in this universe,
right? Everything is in motion. So when we look at the motion that we see in the cosmos,
yeah, we do have entropy, right? Principles of disorder.
Um, but we also have principles of order, like the, just the very basic laws of nature,
which Einstein calls miraculous, right? Like the fact that we have any laws of nature that
are intelligible, these like repeated patterns, these patterns of, of motion of organized motion
that just keep happening over. Why, why do we have this? Why don't we live in a chaotic universe
where everything is just entropic and that's it. And I'm not making a, a, um, modern fine tuning
argument where I'm saying, Oh, the value of the constant, like I'm saying even more general, like,
why are there physical laws of any kind? Like, like, why are there laws of nature?
I think you're saying something even more general than that. Why is it that when things unfold there,
there, there's still an intelligibility within them. They don't unfold into a kind of
inaccessible absurdity. Yes. Correct. So what we have here is we not only have intelligibility,
we have what Aristotle might call intelligible motion. Yes. Yes. Right. Intelligible. So we have
motion as Aristotle said, he was right. And motion needs an explanation. But what really needs an
explanation is intelligible motion, which, uh, people like Steven Oderberg would call, uh, teleological
activity, you know, or, uh, you know, or, or, or even just the, the basic notion of fuses,
which is, which is what Aristotle's talking about, like physics fuses is this into where,
because the problem when I understand what you're saying, I just want, this is for the purposes of
people listening. Lotion motion for Aristotle doesn't mean locomotion. It's not just this, when things are
growing, when things are developing or changing, he also calls that intelligible motion.
Yeah. Any kind of change, any kind of change, any kind of change that for which we can generate a
science. That's what Aristotle is meaning. Yeah. So, so the, the, the last thing that needs explanation
is, uh, what you might call goal directed motion, um, which is some, I know you have some gripes with
the term teleological, but people like Oderberg use teleological in this, in this grander sort of sense.
So I use the term as he uses teleological motion. So ultimately, um, teleological motion or goal
directed motion or intelligible motion that the whole cosmos partakes in, there has to be an
explanation of that. Now, the one is the one by itself doesn't explain that. And the news by itself
doesn't explain that there has to be an RK, a hypothesis, right? Which is the RK of intelligible
motion. So the hypothesis itself must be in a state of intelligible goal directed motion. And that is
what the universal soul does within the model. So yeah, the universal soul is itself responsible
for bestowing what we today call all the laws of nature. And not only that, like the very human
aspiration for seeking intelligibility, for seeking fulfillment, uh, for actually any type of activity
where you set a goal and then go for it, like you'd set a goal and you devise a plan, a step-by-step plan,
and you sort of move toward it. Right. Uh, when you're trying to achieve like flow states, this is
just a human level. The universal soul is the explanation of that because the universal soul has done
that like this whole cosmos is the emanation of the universal soul on its own, on its own, uh,
goal-seeking activity. And we partake in that. That's why we feel the need to always aspire for
something more than like what we have now, you know, uh, not just spiritual quest, but any type of
sort of self-improvement that, that we have, the universal soul is ultimately, um, uh, you know,
supplying us with, with those aspirations. Well, uh, so yeah, I, I do have gripes with, uh, teleology,
but I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna, uh, I'm not gonna belabor that right now. I mean, um, I, I,
even if you think of the idea that there is some kind of harmony and, and, and mutual togetherness,
and that even shows up in notions of entanglement, um, and things like that. Um, I think that that's
getting to what, um, is being thought about by the world soul. Um, and I think your argument is
right. Uh, what is it we need to explain? Uh, by the way, people have been hearing, uh, hypostases,
this is, uh, break it up into its, uh, etymology, hypostasis, that which stands under. So what, like,
meaning what is the basis of explanation for X? That's its hypostasis, right? Um, and so, I mean,
sometimes it gets translated as substance. I have problems with that too, because of
what's happened in the history of the idea of substance. But if you think about whenever
we're trying to understand, we're trying to get what is, what is behind it or underneath it,
that is the ground for it being explainable or understandable. Just so, uh, that's the,
what he means when he's using that, that term. Um, well, I want to talk to you some more,
but, uh, we should probably wrap it up for today. Um, um, so I, I mean, it, it, it, one of the things
that I'm taking away from this is, I suppose I'll leave it, I'll turn it with one last question.
What, what do you, like, what do you individually and what might Ismailis or Neoplatonic Muslims, like,
Neoplatonism isn't, like, it didn't stop with Proclus, right? It keeps going on and on and on,
like you have Ficino, right? In, in Italy and, and, and you have modern Neoplatonists today.
Um, you have Whitehead, who I think is really best understood as a Neoplatonist. Um, and he's a
Neoplatonist. He's showing what Neoplatonism looks like after the Einsteinian and quantum revolutions.
Like, does that ever reverberate, does it, or at least can it reverberate back into Ismaili theology and
say we should update our, uh, our theology because there's been sort of updates in the Neoplatonism?
Um, so, so I, I missed part of what you said, but I, but I think I caught, I think I caught
what, what you're asking. So you're basically saying...
I gave the example of Whitehead, somebody who takes Neoplatonism past Einstein,
past the quantum revolution. And it's a significant rethinking of this. And, you know,
processed takes the place of substance, things like that. I would argue that, uh, and many people
would agree. I think Whitehead is a Neoplatonist through and through. He, I think he sees himself
that way. Uh, you know, everything's a footnote to Plato. Um, and my question is, does that like,
so I don't think of Neoplatonism as dead and done. I think of it as a living tradition. If it's a living
tradition, it should feed back into the theology that has taken life from it in some ways. I mean,
I mean, in a good sense. Yes. Well, I'll give you, I'll give you an example of, of how it's one way
that it's sort of still very much alive for Ismailis in the Ismaili experience, even for people who
don't know it. Uh, and I'll just also share sort of what can some contemporary Ismailis have to say.
So, uh, we'll, we'll start with the latter. So, um, like every religious community, Ismailis are
diverse. Um, and there has been a general, uh, this has happened to many Muslim communities and many
Western Christian communities. Um, many people in the community, uh, through migration and, uh,
technology, uh, you know, modern life have just become out of touch with their own intellectual
traditions. So just like many Christians are not aware of, you know, most Orthodox Christians today
who grow up already Orthodox are not going to know about a lot of their theology. Um, the same thing is
happening in Muslim communities and Ismaili communities. Your average Ismaili might not
not know what Neoplatonism is. However, the Ismaili leadership, the Ismaili Imam for the past 50 years,
um, he, he created the Institute of Ismaili studies. And a lot of the texts that they publish
into English are Neoplatonic texts. So there seems to be an effort from the top to bring Ismaili
Neoplatonic thought, uh, into the hands of community members where they have access to it, not as a dogmatic
thing, but as a sort of, look, if you're doing a personal search, this will be helpful to you. Uh,
that's the only reason why I can be a Neoplatonist because I was given access to my tradition through
the funding, uh, of the Ismaili Imam through the publication efforts that, that the late Aga Khan,
uh, has undertaken. Um, so now the material has made its way into the hands of many of us.
Now to that, there, there are three responses. The first response, uh, is indifference.
It's, oh, this is very interesting. Uh, I feel proud that this is part of our heritage,
but I'm going to go work my finance job now.
Yeah, of course, that's one response. Um, the young, you know, the professionalized class
doesn't really care about theology. Okay. No problem. The second response, uh, and you find this
among some Ismaili academics, uh, where they, they say that, um, Neoplatonism should be treated like a
museum. It's very nice to look at, but it's dead. And, uh, we shouldn't, we should not take it seriously
anymore. We should, we, in fact, some of these people believe that no theology should be taken
seriously anymore because they feel that, uh, only historicism is a legitimate form of inquiry.
Okay. Uh, so I'm sure. Yes. And I, I mean, I, I practice history very seriously. I think I've
demonstrated that, but I take historicism. I have deep, deep abiding criticisms of it. So yeah,
go ahead. So, and so did Corbin, right? I wrote one of my general exams on Corbin's criticism of
historicism, uh, where he said, the problem here is historicism is a product of man.
Man is not a product of historical. So we have people like that. In fact, I mean, many of my
colleagues who I have very good collegial relationships with, they are resolutely
anti-Neoplatonic and anti-metaphysical. That's just how they see it. Uh, and, and we'll butt heads,
you know, and argue about it. And then we'll just say, okay, we agree to disagree. So that's the
second response. The third response is the type of thinking that I champion, which is to say Neoplatonism
is part of the Islamic and the Ismaili heritage. Uh, the current Ismaili Imam has said nothing against
Neoplatonism. In fact, he continues to, to evoke Neoplatonism, even in public speeches.
And therefore this is something that we have to take seriously. And me as a professional, this is why I'm
talking to people like you is I'm trying to bring Neoplatonism back into like the contemporary
discussions of the intelligentsia of our society, uh, as a serious paradigm. Um, but even apart from
our, I mean, this is not really the ivory tower, but even apart from the ivory tower for, for the
Ismaili tradition, I mean, I'll give you an example of how Neoplatonism is still alive. So if you look up
a speech of late Aga Khan the fourth, right, uh, in almost all his speeches, he talks about, uh, the
unity of the human race and the need to accept pluralism of culture, religion. And then he quotes
a verse of the Quran to, to back up his point. And the verse he quotes almost in every speech is where
God says in the Quran, and I'm paraphrasing, uh, we have created all of you from a single soul.
And the Aga Khan always focused on this verse. He kept saying in his interviews, like, God has
created humankind from one soul. And therefore we all have the spiritual unity that underlies our,
our various differences. That's a very Neoplatonic idea, right?
Because Ismailis historically interpreted the verse the Aga Khan quoted as referring
to the world soul.
Of course.
Like when the Quran says, God created you from one soul, that's the world soul. And if there's
a world soul, there's also an intellect, you know, that it emanated from. So this is a very
practical example. The other way that, that this Neoplatonic paradigm really hits close for an
Ismaili is, uh, who the Imam is. So in Ismaili belief, um, certain human beings who've developed
and actualized the human state, certain human beings become reflections of the Neoplatonic
hypostases.
Yeah. This is like theosis very much.
Yes. So for Muslims in general, for those Muslims who believe in Neoplatonism, we see Prophet Muhammad
as a human mirror of the Neoplatonic noose or intellect. Like he's achieved a spiritual unity
with that hypostasis. So everything Muhammad does is directly guided by the intellect and in conformity
with it. And in the Shia tradition and in the Ismaili tradition, the Imam of the time is the
reflection at a human level of the noose. So when you see the Imam, you're not just seeing like an
earthly human, you are, but that earthly human is like a portal to experience a glimpse of, of the
Neoplatonic noose. And similarly, the Imam in his secondary role, uh, what Ismailis call a peer,
which I won't get into the details, but the Imam also holds a secondary position, which theologically
is seen as the reflection of the world soul. So now when you encounter the Imam, even at a personal
level for Ismailis, uh, you know, when the Imam meets Ismailis, he'll give blessings. And he uses this
phrase, uh, he gives paternal blessings and maternal blessings. The paternal blessings is a reflection of
the intellect and the maternal blessing is a reflection of the soul. So for Ismaili spiritual
life, the role of the Imam is to reflect the hypostasis to the community. So as to help each
individual aspirant attain union with the soul and with the intellect. So that's how it's like a very
living presence. Neoplatonism in it for Ismailis can be a very living presence, like in day-to-day life.
That's fantastic. We're going to, we're going to have to, I mean, that was joyous to hear,
but we're going to have to, we're going to have to, uh, uh, come to a close, uh, because we're,
uh, Ben, are we going to shift and take questions now?
Yep. So I, do I hit, I hit stop, right? Is that correct?
Thank you very much for all of those. And thank you, Kalil for, uh, we're just saying goodbye to the
YouTube audience. And now we're going to pivot and talk to the lectern students.
So, yeah.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Whoo.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
