Do you require excessive admiration? Is your birthday exceptionally important to you?
Do you have large, grandiose eyebrows? If so, congratulations! You may be a narcissist!
Discovering you're a narcissist may be a shocking and jarring experience for you.
You might have questions like, what does this mean for me? Or, will my friends find out? Or, is this going to make it harder for me to bend others to my every whim and siphon their energy?
And of course your first questions would be about yourself, narcissist!
Well, worry not. It just means you're evil. That you're a secret monster wearing the clothes of a normal human and that there's no act against you that's wrong.
Now, if you're watching this and you're not one of these narcissists, you might be getting a little bit scared.
It seems like I'm suggesting that the world is full of covert energy vampires, masquerading as regular folks, just waiting to pounce on your soul.
Well, rest assured, you are completely right. The Earth is a dangerous and terrifying place, and most of it is out to get you.
But what if I told you that you already have the tools to detect these sociopaths hiding in plain sight?
In fact, with the power of life, it's easy!
By the time you finish watching this video, you'll be able to perfectly pick out the villains in every room.
Just remember, you are a good person.
We live in a culture of fear.
Over the past five decades, we've seen a growing obsession with identifying and labeling the impostors among us.
What sprung up from a culture of self-help books has since evolved into a cottage industry of online creators specifically focused on the dangers of one particular type of person, the narcissist.
As clinical language has increasingly become part of our collective vocabulary, the number of alleged narcissists has exploded.
Videos warning audiences exactly how to detect and defeat them have racked up tens of millions of views and have found favor with a broad range of audiences.
From clinical psychiatrists to wellness influencers to alpha male wolf types, a broad range of creators have found a very lucrative niche in teaching viewers how to protect themselves.
But where did this trend come from?
Who are these supposed covert narcissists?
And perhaps most importantly, is this even a thing?
Oh, yeah!
Oh, yeah!
Oh, yeah!
Oh, yeah!
Oh, yeah!
Oh, yeah!
The term narcissist in an online context is incredibly varied and also usually pretty
divorced from any clinical meaning. So narcissistic personality disorder is an existing psychiatric
diagnosis with specific criteria, including low empathy, a heavy need for external admiration,
grandiosity, strong envy, and a sense of entitlement. But many people using the term
online are not referring to the actual diagnosis itself, the term even predates the construction
of NPD by several centuries. Instead, narcissist is used as a catch-all for someone who is selfish,
manipulative, abusive, or otherwise unpleasant to be around. A particularly popular notion in
these spaces is that these narcissists are covert. That is to say, they mask their true intentions or
emotions and can only be preemptively identified as dangerous through practice, skill, and ideally,
joining an email list and buying someone's PDF. Books like 1998's The 48 Laws of Power and 2005's
The Sociopath Next Door have played a significant role in creating this cultural landscape,
where readers are urged to constantly be on guard against others who may be undermining them.
Author Robert Greene's The 48 Laws of Power adopts a strategic, almost Machiavellian lens on human
interaction, teaching readers both to navigate power dynamics and outwit potential manipulators.
Similarly, The Sociopath Next Door by psychologist Dr. Martha Stout builds on the idea of the covert predator
by suggesting that a significant portion of the population are sociopaths. The book argues that
these people move through society undetected, blending in while secretly manipulating those
around them for their own gain. Basically, certain personality traits make people dangerous,
and these traits can be spotted if one is sufficiently vigilant. Listen to the terrifying way she puts it.
About 1 in 25 individuals are sociopathic, meaning, essentially, that they do not have a conscience.
It is not that this group fails to grasp the difference between good and bad. It is that
the distinction fails to limit their behavior. The intellectual difference between right and wrong
does not bring on the emotional sirens and flashing blue lights or the fear of God that it does for the
rest of us. Without the slightest blip of guilt or remorse, 1 in 25 people can do anything at all.
As she later explains... As individuals, people of conscience can learn to recognize
the sociopath next door, and with that knowledge work to defeat his entirely self-interested aims.
At the very least, they can protect themselves and their loved ones from his shameless maneuverings.
The Narcissist Next Door, written by Time Magazine editor Jeffrey Kluger in 2014,
is a direct evolution of this tradition. Like with The Sociopath Next Door, it presents the
narcissist as a hidden danger. Someone who blends into daily life, but is driven by selfishness and
the desire for power or control. Unlike with The Sociopath Next Door, though, Kluger has no psychological
credentials. The book is a mix of reporting on studies and personal editorializing, partly about day-to-day
interactions with narcissists and partly about the state of American politics. Incidentally, the book
argues in its first chapter that Bernie Madoff, just about every conservative politician in the United
States as of late, and then Miley Cyrus are all narcissists. Narcissism here is presented as a
subtle, everyday danger that manifests in a bunch of seemingly mundane interactions, like a self-centered
coworker or a manipulative partner. This also makes the concept of the secret sicko more relatable and
accessible to a general audience. People are less likely to encounter a full-blown serial killer
in their lives, but a narcissist? That could be anyone in your immediate circle.
As a result, the modern pop psych fixation on narcissists allows for the creation of a more
pervasive narrative. Narcissists are not just lurking in positions of extreme power, but they might be
living next door, sitting at the office cubicle beside you, or even sharing your bed. This narrative,
tied to books and now especially amplified by social media, pushes the idea that narcissism is a
constant, ever-present threat, and individuals must be well-versed in recognizing these traits to
protect themselves. The self-help industry laid the groundwork for what we see now, where this stuff is
absolutely everywhere. Reddit, in particular, was an early adopter of widespread narcissism discussion.
The subreddit r slash raisedbynarcissists was originally established in 2013 as a support group
for people dealing with emotionally abusive family dynamics. Since then, the community has grown into a
major hub for discussions around narcissism in personal relationships, and currently boasts nearly
one million members. It was one of the first places where we saw a growing fixation with labeling
people as narcissists and sharing strategies for dealing with them. And, as with many things,
once it found an audience on Reddit, it was only a matter of time before it found its way onto other
platforms as well. In this more current, more skibbity digital ecosystem, many self-styled narcissism
experts have emerged, and their content often blurs the lines between psychiatry and showmanship.
A few of these influencers do have actual credentials in psychology, but most do not.
You see a lot of unregulated titles like narcissism expert or relationship coach or mental health
coach used in a way that I would argue is incredibly deceptive. For instance, Instagram
personality and narcissistic abuse healing expert Dr. Annie PhD has a PhD in languages and literature.
The use of doctor in this branding is not strictly untrue, but the nature of this title is downplayed.
She refers to herself as an abuse healing expert among other things, and her website uses a lot of
language about healing and recovery, but no mention of her actual degree to imply through omission that
she is a psychologist, if not a psychiatric medical doctor. This is all to advertise a $30 a month online
membership that includes access to a Facebook group and Zoom calls valued at $7,500.
Or one particularly prominent creator we're going to see pop up a few times here, the narc abuse coach,
has described himself as a narcissistic abuse recovery professional and has amassed hundreds
of thousands of subscribers accordingly. Some of his advice borders on pseudoscience or even phrenology.
In one video, for instance, he suggests that you can identify a narcissist by their large eyebrows.
Their eyebrows are quite thick, which is not to say every person who has thick eyebrows is a narcissist,
of course not. It is something peculiar with their eyebrows. They're filled with dominance, grandiosity, and entitlement.
And in another, he claims there's a distinctive smirk that's characteristic of narcissists.
That particular claim, the narcissist smirk has picked up a decent amount of steam lately in general, and is obviously deeply ungrounded.
Despite the absurdity of some claims, these influencers maintain a scientific aesthetic
that appeals to viewers seeking answers and validation. Even when the claims aren't as patently ridiculous as
narcissist eyebrows, there's a glut of viral content which essentially just asserts that there are secret
tells to identify narcissists. Such as not making eye contact, having a public persona that is different
than the way you act in private, caring a lot about your birthday, spending money on things that make you
look good, worrying about being broken up with, and so on.
The narcissist will always be on their phone when they're around you.
Narcissists are obsessed with money. Narcissists are notoriously bad at giving gifts.
A narcissist will often take their phone everywhere they go, including to the bathroom.
Why does a narcissist sleep so much? They sleep to avoid avoidance.
Long distance relationships are great for narcissists, and here's why.
This notion, and particularly the body language analysis flavor of it,
really came to a head two years ago during the trial between Johnny Depp and Amber Heard.
Suddenly, everyone was an expert on clinical narcissism, and the fact that Amber Heard was
certainly an evil harpy was evident in her eyes, in the way she smiled, the way she breathed.
Meghan Markle, too, has particularly faced the brunt of body language analysis-based narcissism accusations.
Of course, as time has passed and the evidence has consistently vindicated both of these women,
you won't hear a peep about it from these so-called experts, but the underlying idea remains.
The evil walk among us, but there are tells.
Not all narcissism content is this clickbait Barnum Effect type stuff.
A small number of influencers in this space are even themselves diagnosed with NPD,
and aim to either destigmatize the disorder or share their lived experiences.
For example, we have creators like The Nameless Narcissist and Kylie Rackham,
who talk openly about living with a diagnosis and working to better themselves.
However, their followings are notably smaller than some of the larger narcissism coaches.
The more sensational content, the if she breathes she's a narcissist stuff, is much more clickable.
A pretty significant portion of this content is also directed towards survivors of abuse,
blending general abuse awareness with a focus on narcissism.
Many people in survivorship communities use the term narcissist to describe the people who have harmed them,
drawing from the language of psychology to make sense of their experiences.
Many of these folks are seeking answers and support as well as wanting to share their stories,
and as a result, narcissism as a topic has a lot of appeal in these online spaces.
Often though, that conversation begins to shift from prevention of abuse to more surreal,
almost conspiratorial directions.
For instance, these online spaces have seen the development of new psychological archetypes like the
empath, the super empath, and the dark empath.
respectively, people with psychic empathy powers, people with super psychic empathy powers,
and people with antihero psychic empathy powers.
Some content even suggests that these individuals can use their own emotional
abilities to counter the manipulation tactics of narcissists like Pokemon.
The narcissist will never find anyone as great as you. They're never gonna find another empath.
They're never gonna find another chosen one.
This all adds a kind of psionic, supernatural element to the conversation, where defeating the
narcissist becomes a much more literal battle. As a result, the conversation around narcissists
starts to become appealing to a wide variety of communities with slight variations on how it's
presented. You can have the healing crystals flavor of it, the scientific flavor of it,
or the relationship coach flavor of it. But either way, you're getting a cosmic story of good and
evil where the world is under threat and must be rebalanced. In this sense, the narcissist is no
longer just a psychological concept, but a cultural archetype. The narcissist doesn't just mean a person
who is an asshole, or a person diagnosed with narcissistic personality disorder. It's like a
Comedia dell'arte persona, a recognizable character in a morality play in the same way the used car salesman
or the caveman might be. You know the costume before the character even speaks. Regardless of the
branding, ultimately, this content taps into fears of manipulation and offers easy solutions and clear
enemies. If you can learn to spot the secret narcissists, you can gain control over your life.
So… how can we start to unpack this?
We already established that, in the vast majority of cases, when a person discusses
narcissists, they do not mean people with an actual clinical diagnosis. They mean an asshole.
However, I do want to talk about my theoretical standpoints on the psychiatric systems at play here
too, because where these diagnoses do exist, they are not neutral labels either. Psychiatric diagnoses are
not the same thing as, for example, identifying a broken bone or a measles infection, wherein these
things can be observed and categorized more or less objectively. Rather, they are words we use to
describe patterns of symptoms. We see that certain behaviors and traits tend to show up together,
and so we group them together under one name. Virtually everyone on the planet has certain traits that
you'd label as symptoms of disorders. Everyone has traits that autistic people have. Everyone has traits
traits that are considered narcissistic, or depressed, or anxious. It's deemed a disorder when someone has
more than what we consider a normal amount of those traits. So if you have enough of them to
significantly impair your functioning in daily life, that warrants a diagnosis. But, of course,
what we consider a normal amount of something gets changed all the time. What would help you function
in one society and time period would hinder you in another. Behaviors once viewed as morally deviant
or socially disruptive have often been pathologized in order to maintain societal order or uphold
specific power dynamics. Homosexuality was in the DSM in the 70s because it was considered abnormal.
Or going back, we could look at the 19th century diagnosis of hysteria, which was usually applied to
women and pathologized their emotional expression and sexual desires. This diagnosis, which led to
invasive treatments like forced institutionalization or hysterectomy, was deeply rooted in patriarchy.
Another particularly harrowing example is the diagnosis of drapedomania, proposed by physician
Samuel Cartwright in the antebellum southern US. Drapidomania was presented as a mental illness that
supposedly caused enslaved black individuals to flee captivity. While this theory was not widely
accepted in all of the US, it was nonetheless published and taken seriously in pro-slavery circles.
Psychiatric labels, then, have been and can still be deployed to reinforce the values of the time,
including when those values are harmful and oppressive. Even now, we can look at oppositional
defiant disorder, a diagnosis that is often applied to children who resist authority figures or display
defiant behavior. It has also been criticized for being overdiagnosed and pathologizing normal
childhood behavior. It has also been found to be disproportionately applied to children from
marginalized communities, such as black and Latino children. These diagnoses don't spring fully formed
from Zeus's thigh, they reflect and reinforce our cultural values, biases, and power dynamics.
In this case, the dynamic at play, where adults are in control and children are expected to submit,
becomes medicalized through this diagnosis.
Like any other diagnosis, narcissistic personality disorder is not a neutral thing that just exists
in the world either. The history of personality disorders in general reveals how psychiatric categories
have been influenced by societal values. For example, past editions of the DSM have described diagnoses like
passive-aggressive personality disorder, self-defeating personality disorder, and
sadistic personality disorder. These have since been removed, not because the behaviors no longer exist,
but because the psychiatric community's understanding of what constitutes a disorder and what's an acceptable
thing to label someone with have evolved. I'll leave you with a small anecdote regarding masochistic
personality disorder specifically. In the book They Say You're Crazy, psychologist Paula Kaplan discusses
the construction of masochistic personality disorder and the growing critiques that it was
disproportionately pathologizing women who were suffering from abuse. She quotes psychologist Lynn
Rosewater, who was on the DSM-3 committee, as saying,
they were having a discussion for a criterion about masochistic personality disorder and the lead
psychiatrist's wife says, I do that sometimes. And he says, okay, take it out. At other times,
diagnoses like sadistic personality disorder were removed from the DSM not because they didn't
think the personality type existed, but because they were afraid of it being used as a legal insanity
defense. Many of these disorders are also very gendered in their application. Men are disproportionately
diagnosed as narcissists, while women are more often diagnosed with borderline personality disorder.
Now, of course, it's possible that this reflects a genuine disparity, in the same way that women are
more likely to have breast cancer, but there's growing criticism that this division also might just
be sexist. Several studies have concluded that gender bias does exist in how these disorders are
assessed and diagnosed. One 2023 study even demonstrated that when men and women had the
exact same psychological profile, clinicians were more likely to label the men as having narcissistic
personality disorder and the women as having borderline personality disorder. Similarly,
the term narcissistic is specifically often weaponized against trans women in particular.
From poorly conceived, vibes-based studies that argue trans women are marked by a persistent
pseudo-feminine narcissism, to over-diagnosis of trans patients with personality disorders,
to transphobic newspapers and commentators calling trans women's existence a heartbreaking work of
staggering narcissism, these diagnoses are often applied and then weaponized in incredibly biased ways.
Like, yeah, I can't possibly imagine why someone who struggles with dysphoria,
is societally discriminated against, and is accused of being a sex pest en masse, might crave admiration,
be preoccupied with fantasies of a better life, and feel envious of others. Clearly it means they are
evil and clinically insane. Some researchers further argue that BPD and complex PTSD have significant
symptom overlap. This has led to questions about whether the former is being over-applied to women with
trauma histories, while men with similar trauma-related symptoms might receive different diagnoses.
And indeed, when you are given a diagnosis of a personality disorder, you are being given a
highly stigmatized label that often carries shame, blame, and prejudice with it.
A 2022 study found that people diagnosed with BPD often faced significant stigma and mistreatment
when seeking medical care. This included being denied information about their diagnosis,
having their self-harm misinterpreted by healthcare professionals as attention-seeking or manipulative,
and even being refused treatment altogether. Indeed, despite, or even because of the high
suicide rates associated with both a borderline and narcissistic personality disorder diagnosis,
many individuals will find themselves struggling to access support because they are viewed as too
difficult. So to bring this back to online narcissism discourse, when someone is labeled as a
narcissist, we have to recognize that one, this is usually not a clinical diagnosis, and two, even when it is,
this label is not necessarily a scientifically objective assessment of the individual.
Psychiatric structures are power structures, and like any other power structure, they are fallible
and capable of reinforcing hegemony. It's just harder to identify in a lot of these cases because,
well, you're not against science, are you? The values and biases implicit in how psychiatric
categories are constructed mean that we should be very cautious about applying them liberally to label
someone in our lives as a sociopath or otherwise pathologize them. To be completely clear here,
this is not a justification of any harmful behavior itself. The response here, if a person has
mistreated you, is not to simply excuse mistreatment as acceptable. But, rather than reaching for ultimately
flawed forms of categorization, it is far more effective to identify and discuss the actual actions and
their effects specifically and think about how to respond to those, rather than getting mired in a
diagnostic can of worms. So with that in mind, how should we be handling this?
Besides the unreliability of many of these diagnoses, another key issue with this framing is the
dehumanization it inherently promotes. It fosters an extremely binary view of people as either empaths
aka fundamentally good or narcissists aka fundamentally evil, which reduces complex human behaviors to
stigmatizing and oversimplified good vs evil labels. Part of me wants to say we wouldn't invent a mental
illness called annoying bitch who sucks disorder, but looking back at the aforementioned history of
psychiatry, we probably actually would. So even when these labels describe something meaningful,
it's worth asking what benefits our society gains when we categorize individuals in such a demeaning
and reductive way. It's especially important to point out that traits often labeled as narcissistic,
like strongly seeking external validation, are frequently pathologized as deeply sinister.
However, when the exact same actions are observed in other contexts, like anxiety,
they tend to evoke sympathy instead. Whether or not, hey, I need you to tell me right now that you don't
hate me and that you like being around me is a sign of being a sweet anxious baby or a reprehensible
narcissist is purely a matter of branding. The inconsistency reveals a deeper issue. It is not
the behavior itself that is condemned, but rather the label attached to the person exhibiting it.
This leads to the second concern, the suggestion that these traits make someone innately evil.
Clearly, this is not the case. I want to restate again that mistreating other people is never acceptable,
but here, what's being addressed is not actually mistreatment of others as an action. Rather,
it is about packaging people themselves into very demeaning, subjective, and punitive categories.
The focus is placed on labeling certain people as fundamentally flawed or inherently dangerous,
sickos with sicko disorders. This approach doesn't encourage solutions that address the root causes
of abusive behavior. Instead, it promotes the idea of ostracizing a small select group of people.
The figure of the narcissist in this context represents more than just an individual who
exhibits harmful traits. It embodies a kind of folk devil who taps into deep-seated fears about safety.
Especially in individualistic cultures like the United States. Much like past moral panics,
like the satanic ritual abuse scare, the narrative stokes fear and hostility toward others. It suggests
that narcissists are everywhere, waiting to steal your energy, and that the only defense is to constantly
guard yourself against them. This rhetoric isolates individuals, and fosters a culture of suspicion.
We can compare this to the exaggerated fears around human trafficking, where individuals are
warned to be constantly vigilant against an omnipresent, shadowy threat. Human trafficking does
happen, but it's not largely white girls getting snatched out of grocery store parking lots, it's usually
exploited individuals from the global south who are promised jobs in foreign countries and then have
their passports taken away. The point is, when we single out a type of bad person and cast them as
an inhuman, scary, monstrous threat, it's not just the fact that we are likely wrong about the quality
and identity of that type of person. It's also the fact that we are being encouraged towards constant
fear. A kind that isolates ourselves from one another to no end other than to reinforce our own
righteousness. The book Folk Devils and Moral Panics was written in 1972 by sociologist Stanley Cohen,
and was specifically written about a moral panic in 1960s Britain surrounding youth culture,
but it's since been revised several times and really is relevant even now. Cohen describes the
production and replication of moral panics in eerily familiar terms. For instance, in Cohen's case
study, this process involved exaggerating isolated behaviors and incidents until they were perceived
as widespread routine dangers. One fight between some youth rockers in the 60s became,
the kids are out of control and are making our daily life unsafe to live. The public response
became disproportionate, creating a narrative that these deviants were omnipresent threats.
Similarly, narcissists are portrayed as lurking everywhere, waiting to manipulate and drain the
emotional energy of empaths. Relatively extreme actions are elevated to the status of emblematic and
ubiquitous behaviors. This then justifies extreme consequences, whether social, emotional,
or even legal, against those deemed to be the shadowy threat. As Cohen puts it,
If one conceives of the situation as catastrophic and, moreover, thinks it will happen again, get
worse and probably spread, then one is justified in taking elaborate and excessive precautionary
measures. This sort of relationship between belief systems and social control is illustrated
nicely in social policies towards drug addiction. Cohen is saying that fear leads to disproportionate
actions because we'd rather overreact than risk not reacting enough. After all, if something bad does
happen, someone will have to take the blame. Even if an individual recognizes that the threat of
narcissistic energies is relatively unfounded, the constant chatter around this phenomenon can lead to
distrust and paranoia. I'm going to include one more quote of his here, which is how he identifies
the targets of a moral panic. I want to note that the construction of the ever-present energy-sucking
narcissist checks every box. The objects of normal moral panics are rather predictable. So too are
the discursive formula used to represent them. For example, they are new, but also old. They are
damaging in themselves, but also merely warning signs of the real, much deeper and more prevalent
condition. They are transparent, anyone can see what's happening, but also opaque. Accredited experts
must explain the perils hidden behind the superficially harmless. Dakota rocks songs lyrics to see
how they lead to a school massacre. I can't look at videos about the distinctive narcissist smirk or
how you know someone in your life is evil by their body language without remembering this book and
feeling my skin absolutely crawl. As with any other moral panic, this type of belief also shifts the
conversation away from self-reflection. One key commonality in the narcissist panic industrial complex is
the idea that anyone who is worried they might be a narcissist or be toxic is not. A frequent saying is,
if you are worried about whether or not you are a narcissist, it means you aren't because a real
narcissist would never be worried about their potential to do harm. You're truly worried that
you might be. You're not. Narcissists lack empathy and they certainly lack the concern to do anything
about it. So by you finding this right now, let me tell you and reassure you, you are not a narcissist.
If you were a narcissist, you wouldn't be thinking so deeply about not being a bad person.
Narcissists can't self-reflect. So if you're self-reflecting on whether you're the narcissist
or not, you're probably not. For instance, r slash raised by narcissists has a rule that
narcissists are not allowed to comment or post there, but has also claimed that worrying you
are a narcissist means you are not a narcissist. I'm still not sure who the no narcissist allowed rule
is intended to actually exclude then. In other words, these spaces will regularly affirm that you
do not need to critically examine your own behavior. The fact that you have begun to self-reflect is
taken as a sign that you should stop self-reflecting. You could never be the problem. The problem is the
sinister other. By positioning harm as something that only other people do, those with a disorder,
a moral failing, we absolve ourselves of confronting our own potential for it. The construction of the
empath as innately good further entrenches this mindset, as if good versus evil is just a one-to-one
sliding scale of all empathy to no empathy. This binary leads to a dangerous distortion of moral
responsibility. If narcissists are inherently evil, then any harm done to them becomes justified,
even celebrated. Entire industries are built around telling people they are fundamentally good,
that their empathy is what separates them from the monsters around them.
Finally, much like these other moral panics, this tends to harm the most vulnerable people first.
Our vibe detectors are not socially and morally neutral machines. I talked about this with my
West Elm Caleb video where people ended up being completely sure a random TikTok user was a literal
serial killer when in fact she was just a trans woman who appeared impoverished. Similarly, when
society is given carte blanche to dehumanize anyone it decides is a narcissist, it is probably going to
dehumanize the people who it doesn't respect in the first place. Trust your gut is often touted as safety
advice to women, but a lot of the time your gut is gonna confirm your pre-existing biases.
What if you live in a society where racism is institutionalized, as we all do, and therefore
your gut is racist? Or you just happen to assume someone with a visible disability is scary because
your instinct says so? I can say that as an autistic woman, I get a lot of people telling me their gut says
that I just have bad vibes for a reason they can't articulate but are positive is true. I get a lot of,
oh, I bet you're so mean, or oh, you must think you're so much smarter than everyone else type
comments when I'm just existing. Because they're picking up on little ways my tone might be
inexplicably off. In a more clinical context, we can see that many people who are labeled as having
cluster B personality disorders are more likely to have psychiatrists decide they are dangerous,
and this can have real legal consequences for those folks. For instance, someone labeled as dangerous
based on a personality disorder could face restrictions on their freedom, such as being placed under
involuntary commitment, or have their legal rights diminished in court proceedings. But in fact,
many of those predictions are completely off. Singh et al. in 2014 actually did a study on this.
They analyzed 47 databases containing over 13,000 people across 13 countries labeled as high violence
risks, including based on professional judgment, and followed up on future violent crime rates among
those people. And what they found was that the odds of people labeled as violent actually doing any
violence was incredibly variable. They found that in particular, these studies tended to overestimate
the risk for men and underestimate the risk for women, that the characteristics of the people
being assessed can make the validity of any predictions highly inconsistent, and that people who were assessed
using professional judgment tools tended to be more likely to have false positives for being labeled as
violent risks. A lot of the time, being labeled as dangerous to yourself or others serves a punitive
purpose rather than a preventative one. You're often forced into a system rife with abuse in order to
correct a crime you have not committed yet. And when these tools are frequently wrong and vibes-based,
this becomes all the more problematic. As the authors put it,
The rate of violence in patients judged to be at high risk by structured risk assessment instruments
is not constant, varying considerably and systematically within and between instruments. This raises the
question of whether, if practitioners cannot make a reasonable estimate of the base rate for the
population in question, and hence cannot estimate the likelihood of a future violent act for a
member of a category, they should be using high risk categorizations at all. In other words,
predictive warnings like the narcissist vibe detector are unscientific and often discriminatory because
humans are often unscientific and discriminatory. The same harm exists interpersonally. Social media is
filled with infographics and advice columns that promote not only emotional distance, but outright cruelty,
often under the guise of self-defense from narcissists. For example, take a look at this viral
Instagram post from the aforementioned Dr. Annie PhD in English literature. Don't worry about hurting
the narcissist. They don't have a heart to break, remember?
I simply am not there.
Best sociopathic game to play with a narcissist is hot and cold. Use their abandonment issues to control them.
Four ways to torture the narcissist. If you want to create distress, if you want to create anguish,
uncertainty, insecurity, and paranoia, you must reduce their significance.
This kind of rhetoric is not just reductive, it actively promotes the dehumanization of others.
We have created a society where any action, no matter how harmful, is justified as long as the
target has been labeled a narcissist. Once someone is marked as beyond empathy or redemption,
it becomes easy to rationalize treating them as less than human. A narcissist is anyone we don't like,
anyone who has harmed us. A narcissist could never be me, but it could always be you.
Even beyond the fact that these labels can be harmful, discriminatory ways to view the world,
they're also often actively counterproductive. Indeed, this narrative makes it harder to look
into the larger reasons why abuse can occur in the first place. The narcissist, that is to say the
fairytale archetype of the narcissist, is often portrayed as a universally bad character, willing
to harm anyone and everyone indiscriminately. This portrayal implies their evil is non-specific
and apolitical, a kind of inherent rottenness of the soul. But this overlooks the reality that abuse
doesn't occur in a vacuum. The reason there are myriad cases of parents abusing children but we don't
see an epidemic of children abusing parents is because abuse is enabled by structural power imbalances.
Children have very few rights in most parts of the world. Barring severe extremes, they're essentially
treated as property, with unfortunately limited recourse even in those extreme situations.
And now, you might be thinking that, yes, this is true, but this isn't mutually exclusive with the
idea that some people are just evil and broken. And it is perhaps true that some people just enjoy
power, making other people feel small and weak and will lord it over anyone they can. But while that
might sometimes be the case, I think this narcissist narrative being the primary story we tell
ourselves still omits things in a way that actually makes it harder to address these problems.
I would hazard that a lot of child abuse doesn't actually happen because parents are deeply mentally
ill or are setting out to be evil people, yet regardless there are legal and social structures
in place that can lead to these things happening anyway. When you take a look at the aforementioned r slash
raised by narcissists, one of the things you'll see come up consistently is constraining and controlling
behavior. Things like, my parents forced me to have my hair cut in this exact way until I was old
enough to live on my own. Physical punishment was extremely common. My parents used technology
to track my every movement. In any context, this is unacceptable. But these behaviors often
specifically stem from particular ideological places that transcend any one individual's personal
pathology. For example, one of the things you'll notice is that child abuse is more common in very
conservative and very religious communities. I will note that most of the research I was able to
find was in English from mostly US sources and thus was more heavily sampled toward Christianity,
so I can't make definitive claims about all conservative religious communities.
But what I was able to find showed a clear correlation. Jackson et al. found that religious ideology
was a significant predictor of holding attitudes that devalue children- so claims like children
should be seen and not heard- they also found that heavy religiosity was positively correlated
with verbal abuse of children, as well as some other factors like age of the child.
Ellison and Bradshaw in 2009 studied conservative Protestant communities and noted that,
while simply being religious was not a risk factor for physically harming children,
social conservatism, biblical literalism, and a strong belief in hell were.
Similarly, Rodriguez and Henderson in 2010 found that both social conformity and,
again, biblical literalism increased the risk of physical abuse of children.
Moreover, there's a particular cultural emphasis in American conservative Christian
communities on breaking a child's will. Perhaps the most notorious example is the millions of copies
sold of To Train Up a Child by Michael Pearl- a book linked to several deaths as a result of the
methods it encourages. Are all the millions of people who would torture a child because a man suggested in
a popular book that they do so mentally ill? It seems far-fetched. All this to say,
not all religious conservatives abuse their children. And not all child abuse comes from
religious conservative households. But this particular set of beliefs and family structures
makes it significantly more likely. Look at communities like the Quiverful Movement. They're a
strongly conservative Christian sect that places emphasis on large families, traditional patriarchal
leadership in the home, and heavy obedience. And, of course, they are rife with abuse of various
kinds. Women and girls in particular are often treated like livestock, queerness is anathema, and
children of all genders are forced into abusive and constraining childhoods. Is it probable that every
single quiverful parent just happens to have a bad brain? Or is it something else about these belief
systems and family structures that leads to abuse happening regardless? When you exist in a culture that
prioritizes absolute obedience and rigid hierarchical structures- more specifically, a culture that
believes women should unconditionally obey men and children should unconditionally obey parents-
power imbalances are entrenched. It cultivates a mindset where controlling and punitive behaviors are
seen as valid, even necessary. There is a cultural emphasis on parents' rights that is meant to be
all-encompassing. From the right to monitor every action of the child, to the right to treat that child
however they please. It's in fact the same cultural belief behind swaths of book bans
sweeping North America right now. Men are taught that a heavy control of women and children and a
demand for obedience is not just acceptable but fundamental to what it means to be a man.
Women are taught the same. These roles are reproduced over decades and across generations.
These structures often further lack mechanisms for accountability or redress. Abuse is viewed as a
private family matter, external intervention is minimized, and victims are left without support.
The combination of dehumanizing ideologies, entrenched power imbalances, and a lack of accountability
creates a fertile ground for abuse irrespective of individual intentions. The same applies,
albeit to a lesser extent, to the way families are set up right now in general. Families are not just
personal relationships, they're also economic units. The nuclear family is also a means of organizing
labor and resources. So when we look at gender, obviously traditionally men were seen as the breadwinners
while women were tasked with unpaid domestic labor and child rearing, so wealth and power remain
concentrated in the hands of men, which marginalizes women to men and marginalizes children to both of
their parents. Children, meanwhile, are not only economically dependent but also legally and socially
subordinate. Even in progressive families made up of kind people, they are largely expected to obey
adults, follow rules without question, and conform to social norms. When they don't, there is a very
extreme amount of leeway as to how a parent can treat them in response. And even if a parent would never
dream of using that power in a harmful way, that power is always there, and that affects how the
entire social role of a child is constructed and perceived. Women in family relationships are often
even still in a subordinate position. For children in family relationships, they are virtually always
subordinate. These deeply entrenched systems are, I would argue, vastly more responsible for widespread
harm than narcissism. The system isn't just set up to protect bad actors, it's also set up to turn
people into bad actors because of what these roles are. For instance, on top of conservatism,
religious literalism, and high-control hierarchical societies, we also see this manifest in a lot of
cases where a woman is consistently put down, gaslit, or otherwise abused by a male partner. It's become
very common for women to refer to an ex like that as a narcissist. But almost every time this term is
being used, what isn't being said is the word misogynist, even when that might be more appropriate.
Oftentimes, when a woman in particular is consistently mistreated by a man, he will to
some extent hold the belief that women are lesser. That same mistreatment won't manifest in how he
speaks to his male friends and colleagues, but he will be consistently dismissive to the women in his
life. And misogyny is not individual brain poison or something men are biologically predisposed toward,
instead it's steeped in the material conditions of our outside world. Patriarchal beliefs are reinforced
by economic and social structures that benefit men. Now obviously, this does not mean that abuse
doesn't occur in traditionally progressive places, or that a woman can't abuse a man or anything of
that sort. But when you start to look at trends, there is clear linkage between ideology, power,
and harm to others. It is not, by and large, the result of individual pathology, but of social power.
This isn't just true for gender. Are we so sure that politician we hate is a narcissist, or is she just a
racist? Is your boss a narcissist, or is he just a capitalist? Is Donald Trump mentally ill, or is he
a generationally wealthy white man who has grown up since birth being told by others and shown by his
own wealth that he can do whatever he wants and is better than other people? When we describe
narcissists as the bulk of abusers in society, and as indiscriminately evil, we're actually actively
obfuscating the real, solvable problems that enable these dynamics time and time again. How are we
going to fix these problems if we don't even name them? I want to acknowledge something here.
The narrative that those who abuse others do so because of their individual pathology,
because they have evil and broken souls, can absolutely be a validating one to survivors,
and it's not hard to understand why. People who have experienced abuse find themselves isolated and
struggling to be believed, harmed by people who are often outwardly charming and likable to the folks
around them. Being able to hear and articulate, no, they were a bad person, has a lot of psychological
value after you have been made to feel like nothing was wrong with them and furthermore that something
was wrong with you. It's sympathetic, understandable, and profoundly human. The problem, unfortunately,
is that something feeling emotionally validating to people who have survived serious harm is not the
same thing as that thing being true or leading to meaningful change. It might help me in the moment to
believe that a person who was terrible to me simply had a broken soul and that's that, but what does
this narrative exclude? What does it lead to? Indeed, recognizing that there are social reasons this
happens on a large scale doesn't make these problems any less important. On the contrary,
it's a necessary first step to proposing actual solutions to resolve them. Every time we have this
conversation while shutting out important aspects of how these systems occur, we are failing to address
important root causes. Moreover, if this narrative is true, how do we begin to prevent abuse?
When the root causes go no deeper than a given individual, the only solutions we can begin to
conceive of are 1, reactive, 2, individualistic, and or 3, carceral. That means we can't prevent
these things on a large scale, only react after it happens, that the only change we can hope for is
fixing ourselves and not society, and that some people are just rotten and ought to be thrown out
of society entirely. In fact, this pathologizing approach to discussing abuse doesn't just fail to
address these systemic factors, it can also actually make them worse. Once again, the narcissist
narrative promotes the idea that you are surrounded by a number of human-like but not quite human
monsters who are out to get you, and that all of the harms and evil comes from within them and not
from anywhere broader. And what this promotes is a culture of fear and isolation from others.
The world is separated into empaths and narcissists, and if you are a truly good person then harm and
abuse doesn't come from you, but from a danger that lurks outside you. And it is, in fact,
this exact isolationist and fearful culture that can enable abuse in the first place.
Journalist Janet Heimlich, an author of Breaking Their Will, Shedding Light on Religious Child
Maltreatment, discusses these specific types of conservative religious culture that are particularly
posed to enable abuse as follows. There are three perfect storm factors that identify a religious
culture or community as authoritarian. One, the culture has a strict social hierarchy. Two,
the culture is fearful. And three, the culture is separatist. The more intense these three factors
are, the more authoritarian the culture is, the more likely children will be harmed.
Which is as good of a time as any to talk about the real root cause behind this bulk of social media
narcissist content. One of the things you might start to notice with narcissist content online is
that it almost always follows a very specific pipeline. You start watching one or two videos
about narcissists and sociopaths, and often these seem relatively measured, and then you start to get
recommendations about demons. Like actual, biblical demons. And at first it's like, why are these two
things connected? And then you start to notice the hashtags on a lot of these narcissist videos
also include phrases like, spiritual warfare, demonic narcissists, narcissist black eyes, and then it's
like, oh, that's what this is? That's what this is. The connection between narcissism and demons is
not random. It is deeply rooted in a very specific, very conservative worldview. The concept of
spiritual warfare is absolutely central to this belief system. This is basically a narrative that
posits that the world is a battleground between good and evil forces, where demons and angels
influence human behavior. Narcissists, in this context, are not just psychologically difficult or
harmful individuals, they are literal vessels for demonic forces. So for instance, as you start
watching the more explicitly religious ones, one idea that you'll see talked about a lot, like a lot a lot,
is the idea of the Jezebel spirit, which narcissists supposedly have. This is a term used by some
Christian influencers and ministries to describe a demonic entity that they believe influences
individuals, especially women, who exhibit controlling, manipulative, or seductive behaviors.
People with the Jezebel spirit, narcissists, do this. They're controlling. They're manipulative.
They're charming. They're sexually impure and selfish. They'll push their victims to have sex before
marriage. The trick of the enemy to stop you in your journey, in your walk, in life, just because
he hates you so much because you're a child of God, is to send a narcissist, which has the spirit of
Jezebel, right? Jezebel hates God's prophets. Someone with the Jezebel spirit refuses to admit
when they're wrong or take responsibility when they make a mistake. That is a demon in that person.
That person has a Jezebel spirit. Ever heard of the Jezebel spirit? It's named after Queen Jezebel from
the Bible. She was manipulative, controlling, and oh so charming. Kinda sounds like a narcissist, right?
As a note, most of the accounts I've seen promoting this narrative are Christian. Though not all,
I've also seen similar narcissist demon-y content both from Muslim and generally psychic-y essential
oil pagan type influencers, but the bulk of popular content that I've seen appears created by and
geared towards specifically conservative Christian viewers. Hence the fact that this whole Jezebel
spirit idea is obviously deeply sexist, and the idea of human-but-not-quite-human people that are
wandering the earth who look like us has also been used as a vessel for anti-semitism in the past.
Many survivors have reported seeing the narcissist turning into a reptile-like creature,
with dead or flat eyes, with very dark irises or eyes that appear black, with a soulless piercing stare.
To be clear, this is not a fringe idea. This is a cottage industry in and of itself,
and is an incredibly common endpoint for this type of narcissist content. You've got counselling
services, influencers, and online ministries explicitly using this connection to advertise
themselves. This normally smallish pastor account got over a million views by pivoting to focus on
narcissism and claiming they are demons. More largely you have accounts like Spiritual
Whistleblower with half a million followers focusing heavily on narcissist content, and in fact she's one of
the first people who popped up for me just searching narcissist. Even the more benign videos have
hashtags like spiritual warfare on them, though most of the videos themselves are largely just about
abuse. And then the further into her videos you look, yeah it's demons. Demons all the way down.
What they did was take orders from Satan to destroy you.
And many of the most popular videos about narcissists on online platforms, at the very least,
include some kind of sneaky demon-related tagging. So for instance, one of the most common gateway
tactics to sneak demon stuff into these videos is through mentions of narcissists having black eyes.
This is incredibly common. When I look up narcissist right now, literally one of the first videos you
will find is about how you can identify a narcissist by looking at their eyes and how they have scary black eyes.
Their eyes will literally turn black in a matter of seconds. Oh my god, this is dangerous. Oh my god,
there's a reptile in the room. Sometimes there's a pseudo-scientific explanation for why this happens.
Their pupils are dilating because they're angry. The uniquely narcissist trait of being angry.
That one has over a million views, by the way. But you keep watching stuff from the same creators,
and it's demons again. Narc Abuse Coach, the grandiose eyebrows guy with over half a million
Instagram followers. Yep, demons. Even outside the apps, we can also look at places like Above and Beyond
Christian counseling. They describe narcissism as being driven by a range of demonic entities,
such as the spirit of insanity, which causes confusion and chaos.
Love, honor, and respect is another anti-abuse service which explicitly claims narcissism is
demonic possession. This is not a rare notion, and I would argue this gradual shift from psychological
analysis to spiritual warfare appears intentional in many cases. Influencers and ministries use these
narratives to attract and retain followers who are seeking answers to their difficult relationships.
By framing narcissists as possessed by demons or the Jezebel spirit, they offer a clear,
albeit extreme, explanation for the harm these individuals cause.
I think it's clear why this narrative is both popular and harmful. It plays well with American
conservative Christian influencer audiences because it is an American conservative Christian way of
viewing others that has gotten a few either feminist or scientific sounding rebrands. And what's worth
mentioning here is that this undercurrent of spiritual warfare content colors the entire way
narcissism online is discussed. It also bleeds into how legitimately secular creators talk about
narcissism. Like, let's look back at the dark empath or super empath content, right? In this framework,
empaths are portrayed as almost angelic figures with heightened sensitivity and moral purity while
narcissists are cast as inherently malevolent. It's the exact same binary as the traditional spiritual
warfare narrative, but with the language modernized to fit a secular audience. Clinical language
legitimizes it, but the underlying message remains the same. There are fundamentally biologically good
people and fundamentally biologically bad people, and they are locked in a cosmic struggle. It is a
seductive and dangerous narrative regardless of the form it takes. It reassures viewers that they are on
the side of the righteous, reinforcing their sense of moral superiority and justifying their fear and
distrust of others. Unfortunately, this narrative and the undertones that come with it have consequences
that extend far beyond just discussions about narcissism. When we step outside of this pseudo-psychological,
pseudo-religious framework, we start to notice the same pattern emerging in various other communities
and ideologies. One common thread across these spaces is the idea that I am a real, fully-fledged,
autonomous person, and you are not. So for instance, look at the consistent need for funny,
ironic internet users to separate themselves from normies. Whether we're calling them co-workers or
locals or NPCs. In the case of the latter, it is literally dehumanizing them. Look at the way conspiracy
theory communities talk about sheeple being almost robotic. Look at the way misogynistic communities
of alpha and sigma males talk about betas as if they're homunculi with brains made of cottage cheese.
Blue-pilled and red-pilled. Unenlightened and enlightened. Narcissists and dark empaths.
In some ways, all of this is a reflection of the exact same dehumanizing rhetoric we see
in these watch-out-for-narcissism communities. In all of these cases, we are looking at a reductionist
view that exerts control over how we relate to others, casting ourselves as the enlightened
individuals in a world full of automatons or demonic entities. All of these concepts reduce
complex human beings to one-dimensional caricatures, stripping them of their humanity. All of these
ideas are appealing partly because they are very simplistic fairy tales that absolve the believer
of responsibility while reinforcing that they are complex and virtuous. And all of these narratives
erode genuine compassion, solidarity, and understanding, instead encouraging suspicion,
condescension, and fear. You should be suspicious of any narrative that tells you you have a power
that makes you a fundamentally good person and it is your duty to detect and combat fundamentally bad people.
Of course, the one exception to this is if you're a medium-gray empath with a hint of lime.
The most important thing I wanted to get across with this video is that people aren't
caricatures or one-dimensional figures. By labeling others as inherently good or bad,
we oversimplify their humanity and lose sight of the nuance that make each person unique.
Lindsay Ellis has a fantastic video on Guy Fieri that explores how he was unfairly caricatured and how
public perception has shifted over time. It's a great example of reimagining our preconceived notions
about someone, and I highly recommend it. You can find it on Nebula. Similarly, if you're tired of ads,
interruptions, and waiting around for my videos to hit YouTube, then good news, I also publish all
of my videos early and ad-free on Nebula. Nebula is a streaming service that's been built by and for
creators like me. It's a space where we can share our videos ad-free, publish them early, and even
create exclusive projects you won't find anywhere else. For me, there's Debater Theater, where I examine
how the world tries to persuade us in various ways, and we also have tons of other amazing projects
from creators you love, like Jessie Earle's sci-fi thriller Identities and Abigail Thorne's Play the
Prince. Nebula is increasingly producing a ton of amazing, high-quality originals you can only find
on the platform. We have The Getaway, a game show where six creators are trying to find and vote out
a mole, with the twist being, they're all the mole. We just released Dracula's Ex-Girlfriend, a film
produced by Abigail Thorne about the relationship between two women who have become entangled with
Dracula. There's also Patrick H. Willem's sci-fi musical comedy Night of the Coconut, which I
actually have a cameo in. Nebula is enabling creators like us to make thoughtful, enjoyable,
high production-value movies and series, and I can't recommend it enough.
Right now, you can get 40% off an annual subscription to Nebula, that's just $36 for a whole year or $3 a
month, by visiting go.nebula.tv slash sarahz, or by clicking the link in my description. It's half the
price of the monthly plan and a great way to support what we do and enjoy thoughtful content.
Again, that's go.nebula.tv slash sarahz.
On top of a big thank you to all my patrons, I'd like to give a special thank you to my $20 plus
patrons, Matthew Sample, James Dugan, 124mm10, Robert Valentine Allen, and Infelicitous Rips.
Thank you all so much!
Thank you all so much!
When I look at you, bring me back myself, bring me up the rain, bring me up the storm, bring me up the storm, bring me up the storm, bring me up the storm.
Bring me up the storm, bring me up the storm.
When I look at you, bring me back myself, bring me up the storm.
Bring me up the rain, bring me up the storm.
I'm gonna take the storm.
I'll see you all next time.
I'll see you all next time.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
We'll be right back.
We'll be right back.
