New Thinking Allowed is presented by the California Institute for Human Science,
a fully accredited university offering distant learning graduate degrees that focus on mind,
body, and spirit. The topics that we cover here, we are particularly excited to announce new degrees
emphasizing parapsychology and the paranormal. Visit their website at cihs.edu.
Thinking Allowed. Conversations on the leading edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey Mishlove.
Hello, I'm Jeffrey Mishlove. Today, we'll be exploring the deep truth of religious myths.
With me is Dr. Bernardo Kastrup, a computer scientist and philosopher. He is the author of
Rationalist Spirituality, an examination of the meaning of life and existence informed by logic
and science. Also, Meaning in Absurdity, what bizarre phenomena can tell us about the nature of reality.
And, Dreamed Up Reality, diving into the mind to discover the astonishing hidden tale of nature.
Also, why materialism is baloney. How true skeptics know there is no death and fathom answers to life,
the universe, and everything. And, brief peeks beyond critical essays in metaphysics, neuroscience,
free will, skepticism, and culture. Also, more than allegory on religious myth, truth, and belief. And,
to be published in 2019, The Idea of the World, a Multidisciplinary Argument for the Mental Nature of Reality.
Dr. Kastrup lives in the Netherlands and this interview is being conducted on Skype. So, now I'll switch over to the Skype video.
Welcome, Bernardo. It's a pleasure to be with you once again and
we'll be talking about the deep truth of religious myth, which is interesting because, you know, some of my
favorite public figures, like Bill Maher, who's a popular comedian, make a big point about how
religious myths are false and people believe in talking snakes and what kind of nonsense is that.
you really endeavor to address that problem.
Yeah, I think, you know, we bring a very modern attitude to the interpretation of religious myths.
I mean, interpreting something very literally is a more or less modern phenomenon in human history.
Similarly, analogy, metaphor, symbolic interpretations,
have been the mainstay for a long, long time before we brought this attitude of trying to
interpret everything literally. Of course, if you interpret religious myths literally,
then they are not true. They are certainly not literally true. Thank goodness, because otherwise,
they would be so flat, so uninteresting, so almost meaningless, I would say.
But if instead of looking at the finger, you look at where the finger is pointing to,
what it's trying to indicate, what it's trying to evoke within you, then I think it's a whole
different story. But in the title of your book, More Than Allegories suggests that you don't want to just
limit the metaphorical interpretation. That in itself is rather flat.
Right. Because what is the difference then, right, between a metaphor or an allegory and a myth? I think
an allegory is a colorful, interesting way to say something that can be said literally, that you can't
precisely describe or explain in a direct, literal way. But you can use an allegory to make it more
interesting or to make it easier or less complex or more evocative, whatever. But there is a literal
alternative. The difference here is that when you're talking about a symbolic message, the difference is
that there is no literal alternative. That it is an inner experience that you're trying to evoke in
somebody else's mind in a way that cannot be indicated conceptually, cannot be indicated through
direct descriptions. It has to be evoked. It has to be pointed at. It has to be made to arise by itself
within somebody else's mind. Because you see, there is nothing in our understanding of nature that requires
that the linguistic structures evolved by a primate species on planet Earth should be sufficient to
directly and precisely describe the deepest truths of nature. I mean, that's preposterous, right? We know
that my cats cannot describe the deepest truths of nature through their meowing language. Why should we?
It's a very anthropocentric thing to imagine that we could literally capture the deepest truths according
to our own linguistic constructions. And these same linguistic constructions underlie human rational
thoughts. I mean, no one Chomsky has been putting forward that idea for about 50 years now, I think, that,
you know, the structure of our thinking is the same as the structure of our language, that there is a universal
grammar, so to say, underlying how we put concepts together to weave stories and explanations and
descriptions. I don't think there is any reason to think that the universal grammar encoded in our
primate species, Homo sapiens sapiens, should be powerful, comprehensive enough to evoke within our own minds,
or in the minds of the people we're trying to communicate with, the deepest truths of nature. I think that
that can be achieved only in a symbolic way, in a way that appeals to the deeper mind, the mind that
underlies the intellect, that underlies reasoning, conceptual reasoning, which is a much more ancient
mind, phylogenetically speaking. It's been there for a long time. It's much more rooted in the, you know,
the primordial soil of nature, so to say. It's much more connected to the primordial truths.
It's not yet lost in a cloud of conceptualizations and alternative conceptual realities and reality
tunnels, you know, which unfortunately, or fortunately, I don't know, is the culture we live in today.
Well, I think many modern people would respond to your argument here by saying, look at science.
Science has had amazing success at describing nature down to many, many decimal points of precision.
That's absolutely true. Science is extremely successful in describing the behavior of nature.
The entire scientific method is based on observation, confirmation by observation. When you observe nature,
what you observe is nature's behavior. If something happens here and that leads to something happening
there and there is some correlation between the two, that's what you then model through scientific
models and which you then use to predict the future behavior of nature anchored on past observations.
But this whole thing about behavior, it doesn't tell you much about what nature essentially is,
about what essentially is going on. And there is a metaphor I like to use.
Imagine you have a five-year-old kid, your son, five years old, and he's playing computer games.
And he's really good at it and he's winning, you know, local championships and maybe even the world
championship in playing a certain computer game. He's very good at understanding the behavior of the
game's characters and, you know, how they should go about their business in order to collect points and,
you know, extend their lives and so on. That doesn't give your kid, your five-year-old kid, any insight into
computer hardware and software architecture, the whole mechanism that's bringing the game to life.
He only has an insight into the behavior of the characters under the circumstances and the framework
of the game. I think science is a method for understanding the behavior of nature under the
circumstances of our perceptual and conceptual abilities, our ability to perceive nature and
conceptualize it and turn that into predictive models. But it doesn't necessarily give us any
insight into the underlying structure. What is bringing this about? What is the essential nature
of being of ourselves and the world? And that's precisely what I think religious myths, the valid
ones, the traditional ones that have some inertia going in the human psyche, it's precisely what they
are pointing at. Well, I know you have a background in computer science, but really you're functioning as
a philosopher primarily. It strikes me. I will soon have a very formal background in philosophy, but I'm not
going to anticipate that. Okay, but what we're talking about is philosophy and it is the purpose of
philosophy to describe the ultimate nature of reality. That's what we call ontology. And you've written
extensively on ontology and epistemology using the English language and coming up with very refined
arguments as a matter of fact. So are you saying that ultimately philosophy itself must fail?
To what extent is a religious myth a form of philosophy? I mean, if you go to India, if you go
to the East, they don't make that distinction. The philosophy of the Vedas, of the Upanishads in the
Vedas is a religious myth. It's philosophy made through the symbolism of religious myths. In the West,
we've made this partitioning and this partitioning has become much more dramatic in the early 20th century
with the emergence of analytic philosophy. Philosophy that is supposed to be conceptually clear, specific,
and direct. Philosophy that doesn't have much tolerance for metaphor, maybe as an add-on at something
extra to make a literal explanation a little bit more appealing, but not as the means of conveying a
message. So we've split this in the West. Now, if I grant this split, I would say we can go a fairly long
way with analytic philosophy. I'm not a pure critic of analytic philosophy. I think it has value. We've
found ourselves and we still find ourselves today in a conceptual morass. And I think the clarity of
thinking, the rigor in the use of terminology and in making explicit each step in one's line of
reasoning, I think that's important. It helps us weed out stories and pretentious stuff there on the
fringes of the culture that try to come across as purely reasoned, while in fact it has a bunch of
implicit mistakes built into it and it has no value. It's just garbage. So I think analytic
philosophy has value in making this distinction. But there is only so far it can go because it's
not symbolic. It's very direct. So it's fundamentally limited by the human intellectual ability, by the
universal grammar of Chomsky. I think we should use it to go until that limit, until that edge.
And it's useful also because our culture is based on communication, and communication is based on
language itself. So our culture can't go much beyond that before appealing to the mythical stories of
religion as well. So it's important we develop that analytic philosophy, but I think we should also
keep in mind that it has its limits. And those limits are such that they don't really satisfy the human
psyche, the human soul, so to say. We want to know more. We really want to have some intuition,
some feeling for the deepest layers of what's going on. And I don't think analytic philosophy can go
there at all and goes to a certain point. And beyond that, you have no alternative but symbolism.
Well, as an alternative to analytic philosophy, we have what's sometimes called the continental
philosophy of Europe. That's a different tradition that relies heavily on metaphor. If I read Nietzsche,
it's quite poetic, for example. He fancied himself as a sort of a philosopher-poet,
right, Nietzsche? There are other examples that are a little less dramatic. You have,
we've talked about him last time, Schopenhauer, and he's in my mind because I'm steeped in Schopenhauer
philosophy these days. He also did metaphysics. I mean, Nietzsche did a lot of ethics, talked a lot
about morals, you know, about behavior, and very limited on the metaphysical side. Not zero,
but it was not really his cup of tea. He even criticized metaphysics quite a bit. Schopenhauer,
on the other hand, based his entire edifice, his entire system on a certain metaphysics. So he
talked a lot about metaphysics, which today is almost purely analytic. Metaphysics today is almost
a purely analytic discipline. If you look at the latest anthologies, Cosmos, Psycheism,
Penn Psycheism, it's all analytic philosophy. And yet, Schopenhauer addressed the exact same problems
in a non-analytic way, in a continental way. What does that mean? It means that, for instance,
his usage of certain terms, of certain words, is context dependent. He will use the word knowledge
in one context with one meaning, and without telling you in another context, he will use the
same word meaning something else. And it's on you to realize, based on the context, that he means
something else. Now, analytic philosophers cannot take this. They cannot swallow this.
They take the first usage and they fix it. And they say, okay, this is what this guy means by the
word knowledge. And then later on, they find another usage of that word. And that interpretation
then doesn't hold it. Otherwise, the philosopher falls into contradiction. And they say, well,
Schopenhauer's metaphysics is untenable. It's full of contradictions. It's not. It's just that the usage
of terms is context dependent, because that comes very natural to most human beings, except mathematicians,
computer scientists, and analytic philosophers. Well, I think it's also very human that we change
our minds quite a bit, or that we have different personas that have different attitudes, beliefs,
inner mental structures, depending on the context that we're in. You see it all the time in politics,
of course. Absolutely. And sometimes these changes of mind aren't even really changes of mind.
They are just, you know, there are many angles from which to look at the same object, the same truth,
so to say, right? And sometimes when you approach the truth from different paths, different angles,
what you describe on the way there can be different, and yet you're converging to the same point,
just from a different angle. In the book, I use the metaphor of the cylinder, that if you take a
solid cylinder and you illuminate it from one side, the shadow will look like a rectangle. If you
illuminate it from another side, the shadow will look like a circle. And now a rectangle and a circle,
they are mutually contradictory, right? Well, yes, in the world of 2D shadows, but in the world of 3D
cylinders, they're perfectly reconcilable. So the fact that one day you say rectangle and in the
next day you say circle doesn't necessarily mean that you changed your mind or that you're falling
into contradiction. You're just approaching the problem, the cylinder, from a different angle.
Well, when you look at reality, you use the term transcendence. That's very important in
your thinking. Perhaps you could elaborate on why transcendence seems so significant to you.
It's my way of highlighting that there is more to nature, there is more to what is true, most likely,
than what can be captured directly, literally, through our conceptual reasoning.
Whatever truths of nature cannot be directly described and made sense of in a literal way, in a
direct way, is from the point of view of the human intellect, necessarily, and almost by definition,
transcendent, in the sense that it escapes the reach of the intellect to capture, model, and make
sense of in a closed, causal manner. It's not etched in stone in nature that the intellect
should have a limit that is coextensive with the limits of reality itself. The intellect is a little,
tiny subset of what's real, right? Well, the logical positivists, who had a lot of influence in the
early part of the 20th century, argued that if we can't analyze something conclusively through the
senses and through logic and reason, we shouldn't talk about it at all, that it's simply nonsensical
to even pursue it further. You seem to be suggesting, no, we have other means.
Exactly. That is the point. If all there were to a human being, if all there was to a human being
were the intellect, if that were the case, then the logic positivists would have a point. There is no
use in going beyond the limits of the intellect because there is all there is to us. So, there's
no use in talking about anything that transcends that. But I don't think we are limited to the
intellect at all. We are not limited to conceptual reasoning. We are not limited to the linguistic
manipulation of concepts in our heads. There is a much more primordial mind, the foundation of the
human psyche. That psychologists would call it the unconscious, personal and the collective unconscious
for Jungians. I don't like the word unconscious. I think it's a misnomer. I think it refers to a part
of mind that escapes our ability to introspect into, to metacognitively access, but it's not necessarily
unconscious in the sense that it lacks the qualities of experience. I think it doesn't. It's experiential
in nature, but we can't introspect into it. That, quote, unconscious part of mind
has been shown even by modern psychology to, to encompass all the degrees of freedom that
consciousness itself has. It has a form of reasoning, although it's symbolic reasoning, it's image-based
mythical reasoning. It holds memories. It has cognitive associations. The whole gamut of mental,
conscious mental activity is mirrored there. But I would argue it has less constraints. It's not
constrained by continuity. It's not constrained by Aristotelian logic, which is more or less arbitrary.
Every logic is arbitrary in the sense that every logic is founded on certain axioms that we just
postulate or consider self-evident, but nothing in nature tells us that it should be so. Even
logicians today, they fight, they have different versions of logic. It's not only Aristotelian logic
out there. There is an intuitionistic logic in which they drop one of the axioms, the law of excluded
middle. Anyway, that, quote, unconscious part of mind is not limited by these axioms. It's a much more
raw, foundational, primordial way of – I don't want to use the word reasoning – thinking, a way of
relating to reality, inner and outer. And I think it has much deeper reach than the intellect itself.
And if it is there, then of course there is a point for human beings to talk about things that
transcend the intellect, because we are not only intellects. There is more to us. So, why shouldn't we
talk about it? It's just a different way of talking. It's not a literal way of talking.
It's talking by pointing. It's talking by symbol. A symbol is something that points at something
beyond itself. It's trying to turn your gaze to what it's pointing to, while a literal description
attracts your gaze to itself. It's not pointing at anything beyond itself. It is what it's trying to
point at. That's the difference. Well, it does strike me that for hundreds of thousands of years,
human beings never had written language or even mathematical symbols. I suppose we had some sort
of spoken forms of communication. But many scholars suggest that in that time, which is 90% of human
history, at least, maybe more, people basically thought in pictures and in metaphors.
Our ability to think symbolically is certainly very old. It has evolved before language. Language
sort of hitchhiked on our ability to think symbolic. Ian Tattersall wrote an excellent book about this in
2012, Masters of the Universe, I think was the name. It's a great book, highly recommended.
So, yes, our ability to think symbolically precedes as more primordial than our ability to think
linguistically and conceptually. And you see that, and now I'm speaking almost as a death psychologist
now, which I'm not, but you see that when we dream. We dream symbolically. Our dreams are not
literal or reasoned expressions of our inner mental activity. It's a symbolic expression. What we have
underlying the intellect, which goes to sleep, is symbolic thinking, mythical thinking. Is it wrong?
From a literal perspective, it's certainly wrong. But is it really wrong in the sense that it's not
pointing at anything of any validity in nature? I doubt that. I doubt that very much.
Well, there are many people who would call themselves rationalists today, or even skeptics,
who would say that, you know, our great concern is what they would call the rising tide of superstition.
And they could point to all sorts of horrors that occur when people take these various myths
literally, and it usually ends up in tribal conflicts. I am horrified at all that as well. I share
that concern. I sympathize very much with the critique. When people take a religious myth literally,
they are doing greater abuse to the human psyche than when they discard the religious myth altogether.
Both are mutilations of the human psyche. Because you see, a religious myth, the whole power,
evocative power it has, is beyond its literal appearance. When you interpret it literally,
you're basically killing it. You're flattening it. Then you're throwing away whatever value it has.
And that leads to conflict, for sure. Because you see, if I'm looking at a shadow on the wall,
and it's a rectangle, and you're looking at another shadow on the wall, and it's a circle,
and we take both literally, then the circle is not compatible with the rectangle. And I will fight
you because for me, the truth is a rectangle. For you, the truth is a circle, and we'll go to war over
it. But if we, oh, what is the shadow pointing at? What is the circle pointing at? Oh, there is a
cylinder, you know? And the cylinder is a reconciliation of the shadow and the rectangle. Ah, now we are going
somewhere. Now we are hinting at something that can be of great value. So, I share the concern
of the rationalists in that sense. At the same time, what is a rationalist? But somebody who
denies many of his or her own psychic functions by saying, well, all that matters is the intellect.
The rationalist, from that perspective, is also committing voluntary self-mutilation.
He's ignoring intuition. He is ignoring mythical, symbolic thinking. He is ignoring gut feeling.
He is ignoring artistic, an aesthetic ability, an aesthetic mode of interacting with the world.
He's ignoring so many things. That's just self-mutilation. I see no reason to mutilate myself
that way. I wouldn't cut off my arm. Why will I cut off my symbolic psyche?
Well, in your pursuit of the nature of religious myth, you have a section in your book on the nature
of truth itself. And interestingly, you end up concluding that everything we believe to be true
about the world is a story we tell ourselves. In effect, not very different at all from a religious myth.
That's the most delicate part of the book. Yes. Yes. You were accurate. Of course, there is
like a hundred ways this could be completely misinterpreted. So I would refer people to
have a look at part two of the book to understand what I mean by what you just said, because it may
not mean what it looks like if we just say it so short. We live in a story, ultimately. Because you see,
if you remove the story, all there is is the present. And the present is infinitesimally small.
It's vanishingly small. When you try to pin it up, it's gone. It's already gone into the past. And
where is the past? It's nowhere you can point to. It no longer exists as far as your experience is
concerned. All you have is a memory, but the memory itself is experienced now in the present. Your memory
is not in the past. And the future didn't come yet. Right? So it also doesn't exist. All you have is
the present, which is vanishingly small because you can't pin it down so small it is. So everything
that exists exists in a vanishingly small space or segment of space-time. So that's nothing.
Experientially, that's really nothing. So we don't leave that because it's so
intangible, so to say. What do we leave then? Where do we leave our lives? We leave our lives
in a story, in a narrative. And that narrative extends experience all the way into the past and
all the way into the future. That's the bulk of human life. The bulk of human life is that narrative.
And there are some narratives that are good. The scientific narrative has value. And if you compare
to some, you know, we have been historically in phases which can be fairly characterized as a
morass of superstition in which horrendous crimes have been committed in the name of a very bad story
that we told ourselves. There is no denying that to anybody who picks up a history book.
But there are other stories that are better. The scientific story is fairly good but has tremendous
limits. And I think we are now hitting the wall with the scientific story because we are realizing,
okay, it doesn't convey meaning. It doesn't convey any deeper purpose and significance to human life.
There is an aesthetic beauty to it, for sure. The scientific story has tremendous aesthetic
power. I don't know whether your listeners will relate to this, but to me, I mean, I used to work
at CERN as a young adult in the beginning of my career. And to me, it was like a religious experience
in a certain way because of the aesthetic power of that. I mean, we were fooling around at the time
with Susie, supersymmetry. And then the beauty of that was just, I mean, nature had to be like that.
Turned out we haven't found any supersymmetric particle yet. So that dream may be a dud, which is
unfortunate. But beyond this aesthetic value, it doesn't convey deeper meaning, purpose. It doesn't
feel the hole that we feel here in the chest, right? Once we dealt with the basic needs of survival,
you know, have enough money in the bank to leave with some security, a good health insurance house
and food on the table, there is a hole that's left. And I don't think the purely scientific story about
the behavior of nature can cover that. We need another story. And I would say we need a modern
religious myth that is not completely implausible, a plausible but modern religious myth. And by that,
I mean a story that transcends the intellect, a symbolic story that points beyond the intellect.
Would that be still a story? Yes, of course, it would still be a story because we live in a story.
That's what life is. Otherwise, it's a singularity. It's vanishingly small. It's intangible.
Well, we're coming now to a point in our conversation, which really fascinates me,
because you create in your book, in the third section of this book, you create a myth. And
I have the feeling that, at least in part, this myth is based on actual experiences that you've had.
And in part, it struck me that your myth is based on a protocol for a new kind of science altogether,
we might call them psychonauts, explorers into the depths of the human mind. And maybe without
giving the whole book away, we could explore that a little bit.
There were two questions there. To what extent is that a real event? Well, it's based on, well,
it's a highly stylized biography, let's put it that way, made to serve the purpose of the book.
So, but I didn't take that out of a hat completely. I don't think I could take something like that
completely out of a hat, if you know what I mean. I don't have enough creative juices to do that,
like that. Is that a new kind of science? That I would resist a little bit, Jeff, to call that.
And I may even have used that characterization a few years ago. I'm not sure. But today, I would
resist that. And let me tell you why. I'm critical of science trying to be everything. Science trying
to be philosophy, trying to be metaphysics, trying to be ethics, trying to be everything. I think it's
nonsense. Science has a very clear definition. It's about observing the patterns and regularities
of the behavior of nature, modeling those, and being able to predict the behavior of nature,
mainly for the benefit of technology. And therein lies the power of science. We can
build technology with it. Like the five-year-old kid can win championships playing that game without
understanding the underlying computer architecture or software that enables the game. I think science
is equivalent in that sense. It enables us to build technology, even if we don't really understand the
nature of reality. We don't need to. We know how it behaves. We can use that to our advantage.
But I think the power of science lies precisely in this limitation of the scientific method.
If we accept that it's limited that way, we keep it clean. We keep it powerful and pure. If we try to
make something of it beyond what I just said, that's where I think we can get confused. Things can become
unclear. We may lose ourselves in something that isn't really science, at least not according to a clean
21st century definition. That doesn't mean that there aren't other avenues, other modes of acquiring
knowledge about reality. I think there are many others. And maybe part three of the book talks about
one of these other modes of acquiring knowledge about reality. But I would hesitate calling it
a new kind of science. I want to preserve science, if you know what I mean. Because I think it's very
powerful according to this more restricted definition. Well, the reason I call it a new kind of
science is that what you have described in several chapters in the third section of your book is
it struck me as a scenario that almost perfectly embodies what one of my friends and mentors and former
professors, Dr. Charles Tartt, published in Science in 1972, an article that got a lot of attention back
then called State-Specific Science, in which he proposed that scientists themselves enter into various altered
states of consciousness to see if there would be consensus reality that might be observable
uniquely through the altered state and not available to us in our normal state of consciousness.
I certainly see the value in that. I have some concerns as well. Let me share with you.
Are there consensus experiences in altered states of consciousness? Absolutely. There is just no doubt
about that. I mean, if I drop some words here talking to you, maybe most of your audience would not know
what I'm talking about. But there will be some who immediately say, oh, I know exactly what he's
talking about. For instance, people who use psychedelics. If I say the dome, everybody knows
what that is. Everybody who has had a decently effective dose of psilocybin or DMT knows what the dome is.
They have been there. It's a shared experience. There is something in an altered state of consciousness
that this word will identify. It doesn't describe it. If I just say the dome and you never had the
experience and you try to imagine a concrete dome or something, it's not that at all. It has nothing
to do with that. It's something completely else. But if you've had the experience, you understand what
the word is indicating. Or if I... I have to interrupt because I have taken psychedelics maybe a hundred
times and I've read your chapter. I know you referred to the dome in it, but I wouldn't apply that word
automatically to my experiences. So that's my concern. You see, there are many people who will
immediately recognize it. Or if I say the Borg cube, many people immediately recognize it. I know at least
one person who will immediately recognize the Toffee machine. So these are experiences that are at least
to some extent shared. Because if you go to a psychedelic festival and you drop these words, people go,
oh, of course I've been there. I know exactly what you're talking about. Many times. Maybe you should
make an appointment and meet over there. But then other people who have had psychedelic experiences do
not recognize it. So these are partly consensus experiences. And it's not only psychedelics.
Meditators share experiences. I mean, the Buddhist void is something that to a large extent shared.
But I have never visited the Buddha. Actually, I have. I have been to the void once. But it was only once.
I don't consider that enough to establish me as a participant in the consensus.
So there is some degree of consensus. But at the same time, you bring so much of yourself to the
experience. And it's so circumstance dependent that I don't think the degree of consensus that can be
talked about is enough for us to say, well, a science can be built around it. There isn't enough
stability. There isn't enough internal consistency. There isn't enough, and I will use this word with a lot
of reservation, but I will use the word anyway. There isn't enough objectivity, psychic objectivity,
for us to identify stable, reliable patterns and regularities of behavior, of experiential behavior
in those altered states, for us to develop anything remotely akin to what might be characterized as
science. I think those experiences, the greatest value they have is to evoke a form of noses,
a form of recognition. Because, you see, scientific consensus is a replacement for
direct acquaintance with what is true. If you don't have direct acquaintance with something that is true,
you need the consensus of a culture, of a society, to convey a proxy of that certainty to you.
Something that you can rely on, even though it have never been directly acquainted with. But nonetheless,
you believe it because others are telling you we've done a hundred experiments and they're all
consistent. We know this is true. That's the end of it. Fine. But when you're directly acquainted with
something that is true, you know it with every fiber of your body. You don't need others to come to you and say,
well, I've published this paper. We've run these experiments. Good for you. But I know, I know what I know.
And it's surprisingly sufficient for the person who experienced it. I know if I say that, other people
will say, well, you can't trust your own experience because, you know, it has been known to be
unreliable. You know, we are all prone to wish fulfillment and visions and hallucinations.
It's all true. But if you've been there, you know what I'm talking about. There is a level. There is
when you pass through that gate, all these arguments about the unreliability of personal experience,
they sort of dissolve. They evaporate because the power of being acquainted with something is just so
absolutely massive that if you decide that you're not going to rely on that, you might as well roll
up in a corner and die because you can't rely on absolutely anything anymore. Ultimately, all you
have is your inner certainty. Even if you transfer that to a consensus of others, that's your inner
certainty that you're doing commerce with. That's the only currency you have.
Transcendent states, I don't think the greatest value is to develop consensus-based science. I
think the greatest value is that they give you direct acquaintance with an aspect of nature that
after the experience you just cannot deny, at least for a while. After a while, you forget the experience
and your rational mind kicks in again and you go like, well, do I really trust what I experienced or
not? And then you're back in Maya. That's normal. Maya, that's an interesting word. It refers to illusion.
Yeah, but yes. Okay, let me be more accurate. You're back in this story, the cultural narrative that
basically defines the reality we live in. A direct acquaintance with the truth happens underneath the
story. It's what the story is covering. It's the veneer on top of the story. On top of the truth,
that's the cultural narrative. It may be more or less opaque or transparent, but underneath that,
there is direct acquaintance with the truth. But after you are back to normal states of consciousness for
a long time and you're back into this culture, watching television, talking to your boss or going
to your doctor, how long does that survive? Not very long. You're back to Maya in the sense that
you're back to the story. Kind of almost like a hypnotic trance. Yeah, an extremely powerful one.
Yeah, an extremely seductive, compelling, irresistible. I think it's completely irresistible.
Maybe some humans have transcended it and I don't know any. Yeah. Well, in your story,
you describe an encounter with a magician who is able to magically transform you from one reality
to another, to another, to another. And each time they seem real. And it's almost like you think
you're going to break out of the illusion only to fall into a different illusion.
Yes. How far you want to go down that rabbit hole without the context?
And I relate that to the skeptic movement. Let me first make a disclaimer. I think skepticism is very
important. Skepticism is an attitude of caution, of doubt, in which you question your own beliefs.
You're like, well, do I really believe this? And if I do, why do I believe that? What reasons do I have
to believe this? I think this is very important. There's also false skepticism out there, which is
basically, well, I don't think story B is true because story A is true. Then you're just basically
a fundamentalist for story A. And then you try to get across as a skeptical of story B.
But even for true skepticism, there is a potential trap. When you question your own beliefs to the point
that you sort of become objective about your own beliefs, that you put them in front of you,
you separate yourself from them and you analyze them coldly. Oh, those are my beliefs. What reason
do I have to believe in those stories? So you sort of extract yourself from your beliefs. This movement
of extracting yourself from your beliefs basically brings you to another set of implicit beliefs
from which you objectively observe the other beliefs that you just extracted yourself from.
this falling back onto another implicit story, which basically is based on a whole belief system as well.
That movement is the best way to get you to buy completely into a different story because it completely
evades your critical abilities. You're not pointing your critical
eyes to the story you fall back onto. You're looking at a certain belief system and you fall into
another set of beliefs that you're not criticizing, you're not evaluating critically. So that was what
I tried to illustrate with that metaphor. And I think that happens at many levels, cultural level,
personal level, even some transcendent levels.
I don't want to give away your whole book because I certainly encourage our viewers to read it for
themselves. But you do more or less end up by concluding that religious myths can be valuable,
even for rationalistic, scientifically minded people. And you suggest that they might start with a myth
with which they feel at least some degree of comfort.
Yes, I think most people, at least, if not everybody, most people, before their
reasoning, their critical reasoning kicks in and forces them to break away from a certain story,
most people have a symbolic story that they actually resonate with, that gives them a sense of warmth,
an intuition that there is something to that, there is something of value to that, although they
can't quite pin it down. Of course, they can't pin it down. Otherwise, it would be literally true.
So then it's the nature of the beast that it can't be pinned down, that it operates at another level
in the psyche. But they force themselves to part ways with it, because their critical reasoning kicks
in, it cannot find space in a literal framework to accommodate that story. So they force themselves to
part ways with it. What I would suggest is, don't do it. Even if you don't understand it literally,
but you feel the resonance at some degree, stay with it. You don't need to say, oh,
it's literally true. Of course, it's not literally true. But why force yourself to dissociate from
something that is clearly resonating at some level? Maybe it grows in you. And maybe at some point,
you develop a certain insight that you'll not be able to put it in words, but which will be
sufficient for you to establish a relationship, not only with the myth, but through the myth,
with the world at large. And that can certainly change lives.
In other words, a sense of a transcendent connection with the world at large being
the ultimate mystery. Yes. I mean, if you look, if you go out at night,
suppose you're on holidays, and you are outside the city, and you are in, you know, in a rural area,
and you go out at night, and you look at look up at the night sky, there are many different things that
you can see, even though the night sky is exactly the same. Some people will just say, well, you know,
just masses of a plasma, you know, collapsed mass that is undergoing fusion or, you know, emitting
photons. Other people will see very different things. Other people will see, you know, expressions
of universal love pouring out in the form of light in a great void in the night sky. Other people will
see the constellations, you know, Orion, Pegasus, and all the mythical stories of the Greeks that are
sort of implied in those. There are many different things you can see, symbolically speaking. And what
determines what you see, your relationship to the world, the meaning you see or project onto the world,
is the myth that you're always running in your mind, you're always running a myth. Even if you're
running the myth of, I don't have a myth, that that's also a myth, that there's always a basic
operating system, you know, a bios, a basic input-output system in your mind, on the basis of which you
you give value to the world, semantic value to the world, otherwise the world would be just a set of
incoherent pixels, and there would be no life as such. So you're always running a myth. The myth
determines to a very large extent the quality of your life. So I think it's very important that we are
cognizant about this, so we can explore the depth of our own psyche to the maximum extent, so we can run the
best myth we are capable of, that nature endowed us with, instead of self-mutilating and saying,
you know, all there is of value to my mind is my intellect and my reasoning and everything else I'll
discard. Well, too bad if you do that. Bernardo Kastrup, this has been a fascinating and I would
say important conversation. I'm delighted to share this time with you and to be able to share it with
our viewers. Thank you so much for being with me. Thank you. It's been a lot of fun again.
And I look forward to more conversations with you.
Book three in the new Thinking Allowed Dialogue series is UFOs and UAP. Are We Really Alone?
Now available on Amazon. You can now download a free PDF copy of Issue 7 of the New Thinking Allowed
magazine or order a beautiful printed copy.
solicitation of the Magic.
