Yeah, thank you, Patsy. Happy to be here with you all for this unlearning session.
I was thinking before we got on of the connection between unlearning and the program we ran in 2023,
the Sanity Project, because, you know, to be sane, what we were saying is just to be fully in reality
and to not reject things that we actually know, but doubt, even though we know them,
and not to accept things that we actually know aren't true.
So the latter requires some unlearning. The things that we've been telling ourselves are true,
that we tell ourselves that we believe, but we don't actually believe when we're brutally honest with ourselves.
I recently did a little practice with myself where I decided I was, you know,
because as some of you maybe know, I'm kind of in a transition zone in my life.
And I'm like, okay, I've got, you know, I'm getting, you know, closer to 60 years old, the final quarter of my life, you know.
And gosh, I really want to be sure that I do what I want to do with the rest of my life.
And not what I think I should do, not what I'm telling myself that I want to do, but what I actually want to do.
Which for me requires unlearning some of the lifelong habits that got in the way of me being able to answer the question honestly of what do I want to do.
So, you know, we've been in the unlearning course investigating various levels, various applications of unlearning,
political, interpersonal, and internal.
Yeah, so basically for most of us, including me, maybe especially me, sanity requires some unlearning so that I'm in reality.
Now, let me just shift a little bit to some of what I've been seeing in the news and on social media.
A lot of the attention in my country is on the fires in Los Angeles.
It was really about to say before I get into that, you know, I was, I just went to Taiwan with Patsy and all four of my children and Patsy's husband, Tride.
And it's really very, it was very grounding for me to, you know, step into a different environment and people are not obsessed with the same thoughts that they are here.
There are so many worlds outside of the world that seems like everything from the vantage point I'm at.
And I'm sure this is true for everybody. It's the, there's this thing, a phrase in Chinese, actually, that describes it.
Jing di zhi wa, the frog at the bottom of the well.
You know, it thinks that, that, that, that little circle of light is the whole world and forgets that outside that well, there are many vistas and horizons.
There are so many worlds within this world, so many things that people are thinking about and obsessed with so many dramas that completely occupy their, their attention.
So, you know, political dramas, political dramas, community dramas, you know, they're, they're, they're just, it was, it was, it was, it was, it was, it was, it was, it was, uh, kind of a relief to step into another world.
Partly because I was speaking another language a lot. Um, and that also shifts my perceptions.
And, and I actually become a little bit of a different person when I'm speaking another language.
Anyway, um, so, you know, then I come, come back and everything's about the fires in Los Angeles.
I talked to a friend, um, he, he was out of town, uh, and, you know, his wife calls him and says that their house burns to the ground and everything he owns in the world is now what's in his suitcase.
So I, I don't want to say anything about this situation without, um, pausing to acknowledge the, uh, tragedy and the anguish that so many people are going through and the fear.
Um, cause I think the unknowing that I've been encouraging in this course, doesn't just rush too quickly to a narrative about what is happening.
And there are sure a lot of narratives in the media, in the far reaches of the internet on social media about what is happening there.
It's like people from, from so many different opinion tribes hasten to incorporate what's happening into their story of the world.
Whether it's, uh, you know, climate change or the leftists in charge in Los Angeles or, uh, uh, arsonists, uh, who are, who are, who are being used to clear out the place for a smart city, you know, and the new world order agenda.
I mean, there's so many different flashing realities here that it's really, you cannot really understand what's happening based on evidence because the evidence can be selected to meet the needs of any narratives.
What's really happening on another level is this, is this kind of vortex of this like whirlwind of narrative, narrative collision, a mangle of conflicting narratives that are kind of mixing together and burning up.
And bringing a little closer to the public, the realization that we don't actually know what's happening in this world.
I think that's a good thing.
A similar thing happened with the, um, hurricane in North Carolina.
So many different storylines.
And as I said, then, and I'll say it now, my job is not to bring clarity.
It's not to provide an answer where to help you choose among these different answers.
Yeah, I've got my opinions.
That's not the most useful thing to offer right now.
My opinions are no smarter than your opinions.
And I could say something about what this portends for this coming year and coming times.
But I don't even think I want to make that kind of meaning out of it.
Let's linger for a while in the human dimension of it.
You don't have to know why the fires happened.
You don't have to be able to assign blame to empathize with those affected.
On the scale of suffering, it's actually probably a pretty small thing.
Shoulder to shoulder with other things happening on Earth right now.
In Gaza, in Syria, in Sudan.
Where millions of children are facing famine.
But that doesn't mean to diminish what's happening.
If it were a matter of mere numbers, then the work of people, I don't know, working with autistic children would seem very insignificant by comparison.
People might spend an entire career, an entire lifetime in a special ed class working with just a few kids.
But on some level, we know that what they're doing is important, worthy.
And we feel such gratitude for those who do this humble work, who are not celebrated as important people.
But as I am fond of saying, they fold the world together.
They ground humanity in a positive version of human nature through the choices that they make in service to others.
I recently listened to a podcast called the telepathy tapes.
It's about profoundly autistic children and young people.
Some of them are adults now who are nonverbal.
Their neurological condition made it impossible for them to learn to speak because they don't really have fine motor control.
Their parents were told by all the experts that the reason that they can't speak is that there's really nothing going on inside the head.
They don't have the cognitive capacity to use language or to understand concepts.
But then they started using these these letter boards where the with a child or the or the or the autistic person could point to letters and spell.
They can't type, you know, they don't have that fine motor control, but they can point.
Turns out that so they can learn and they would even need like someone to help them, like move their hand, you know, help them like support their elbows, support their shoulder.
And so the critics said, oh, you're just, you know, unconsciously maneuvering them to spell words, but they don't actually understand.
So it took, but they could be trained and eventually they would be able to do it with their own hand without support.
And they proved that they actually could understand.
They actually could use language.
And not only were they not demented or of low intelligence, but some of them are genius.
They're just incredibly intelligent.
And this podcast, the telepathy tapes, it's called this podcast gives examples of some of their communications, such deep wisdom.
And.
And they also are telepathic.
They can communicate with parents and teachers telepathically.
They know what their parents did while they were gone, where they were.
They, they can do these tests where the parent is in another room holding, you know, reading flashcards.
And the autistic kid in the other part of the house is describing what's on the cards.
What, you know, the numbers that are on the cards, like they've been doing these control tests.
So here, just a little bit of unlearning away is a profound human resource.
And this is just one example of what becomes available when we let go of what we thought we knew.
A lot of the things that you and I know are true.
A lot of them are not true.
So this unlearning is not about repudiating everything you know.
And learning is to hold it lightly.
To be open to, to, to, to change.
To be receptive to the world that will bring data points that don't fit into your narratives, that don't fit into your beliefs.
So it's a state of openness.
It's a state of ease, actually.
It really is a lot easier to not have to know, to not attach.
And it can be a little disorienting too.
But again, it's not about repudiating things that you do know.
There are some things that are not to be doubted.
Things that you directly experienced.
And you do not have to interpret.
And that if doubt is sown in your mind about those things, that's called gaslighting.
That's called insanity.
To doubt what you actually know.
And so this is what events like the fires in Los Angeles and so many other things happening in the world.
The drones flying in New Jersey, you know.
That this is the opportunity that these events are giving us to return to what we actually know.
To be grounded in that.
And for the rest, to maybe burn off.
To maybe be swept away.
Yeah, maybe you can feel just a little bit of the lightness.
The lightness of being that comes.
My friend whose house burned down in Los Angeles and he lost all of his possessions.
His wife was pleased.
She said, finally, finally we're free.
And she's not speaking out of some kind of privilege.
You know, they're homeless now.
Living in other people's, you know, spare bedrooms with all the kids.
But free.
Freedom is not a permanent condition.
That family will acquire new things.
We grow roots in this world.
But there are moments of freedom.
Where the roots are pulled up and then new roots are set somewhere else.
We go through these special moments of life.
Maybe you can remember moments of freedom.
Phases of freedom where you didn't know.
You didn't know what you'd be doing next month.
Next year.
Everything was possible.
Those are welcome.
Before they happen, maybe they're not so welcome.
I don't think that my friend and his wife were hoping that their house would burn down.
People are afraid.
We're all afraid of change.
Of a relationship ending.
Of a house burning down.
Of our own death.
Of loss.
But on the other side,
sometimes we understand that it was necessary.
The point here is that maybe something like that is happening now collectively.
Maybe something is burning up.
A set of possessions.
A set of certain teeth.
In green habits.
That limited what's possible.
Maybe there's some little part of us that wants it all to burn down.
That wants to be free.
That's ready for that.
Or maybe not quite ready.
That's what you say.
What you say.
I hear a difference.
Here at everything,
there's an irritable puedo going to.
If I have dentro.
I'm range from this note.
My boy's 大такia district.
I'm apart from this note.
Don't assert that it's a funny thing.
Don't say,
What kind of peace that soul might be in front of me?
If you don't know the peace that soul might cause your thoughts in front of me?
I'm gonna say.
The relationship that loves you.
There's a đến.
I've been able to fight with bliss.
We need to settle for tears.
You better.
I just feel sorry,
I think black dei Rosenrillus isn't a right one stop doing.
So it's a nice thing,
