To be a genius, you've got to be crazy. You've got to be crazy because you have to back a new
idea at a time when there isn't enough evidence. Is our current academic system actively suppressing
the next Freeman Dyson or Newton? What does current academic system even mean? Today we're
joined by Gregory Chaitin, a mathematician and a computer scientist who published his first
groundbreaking paper at 15 and went on to become one of the founders of algorithmic information
theory. He believes we're in a crisis of innovation. Chaitin argues that modern academia is suffocating
scientific creativity. We've spoken to Gregory Chaitin before about his inventive work in
metabiology and algorithmic complexity, but today we're diving into even deeper waters of his
perspective at the prestigious Institute for Advanced Studies. Chaitin pulls no punches in
diagnosing what he sees as a terminal illness in how we pursue scientific knowledge. It's not science
that's wrong, it's how it's being squelched and distorted in the modern university system.
Gregory, let's talk about contradictions in mathematics.
You know, contradictions in mathematics are nothing new. Cantor's theory of infinite sets
was full of contradictions. Bertrand Russell, before he wrote the Principia Mathematica with
Whitehead in an attempt to give mathematics a more secure foundation, kept writing about different
paradoxes and contradictions in mathematics, which is why he proposed to use logic as a basis for
mathematics. And that was the reason that Hilbert said the salvation of mathematics will be formal
axiomatic systems, that you can analyze from the outside metamathematically and show that
they don't lead to contradictions and that they're complete, that they enable you to prove everything
that is true. Unfortunately, it turns out you can't do that for all of math, right, due to Ghetto's
incompleteness theorems. But Ghetto's incompleteness theorem doesn't show that mathematics is
contradictory. What it shows is that no very safe formalization of mathematics will be complete.
But in fact, in practice, it's good software engineering now. Mathematicians are coming up with
proof checkers that they use in their actual mathematical research. And these, like Lean,
I think is the name of one of them, these are actually like formal systems that have been engineered
in a way that they can actually be used by working mathematicians to check the work they're doing.
So I think that if you're going to say that mathematics is dying because there are contradictions,
you know, if you want to attack pure mathematics, there are easier ways to do it. For example,
you can say one, two, three, four, five, six, seven to infinity, you don't believe in that.
You know, who's going to see an infinite, infinite set?
Well, I think that's what Joshua Bach does.
Joshua Bach and other computationalists aren't, or they generally tend to be finitists as well.
Yeah, well, it's possible the physical universe is finite, but the mathematical universe is
definitely infinite. Now, where is the mathematical universe? You may say it's in the mind of the
mathematician, or you may believe that it has some kind of reality in a platonic world and that the
physical world perhaps is built out of math, out of this platonic world. These are all fundamental
issues in philosophy. But yeah, finitists, you know, when I was a young student, there were constructivists
who wanted all of mathematics to be done with existence proofs that were constructed. They didn't
like they didn't want you to prove something by assuming that it's not the case and then deriving
a contradiction. And that's a very common strategy in pure mathematics. It can be brilliantly applied
in many cases. And Eric Bishop was one of the people who worked on this. And then with the computers,
there's a big incentive for constructive proofs, because it's nice if you say that a partial differential
equation has a solution and you prove it by assuming it doesn't and getting a contradiction. That doesn't
help you to find the solution. So people with computers who want to actually calculate the solutions
are essentially doing constructive proofs of the of existence rather than reductio ad absurdum proofs.
And so that, but it's still the case, the kind of mathematics I do deals with things that you can't
calculate. A constructivist will say the halting probability doesn't exist because you can't
calculate it. But that's precisely why it's interesting, because you can't calculate it.
But you can say it doesn't exist. Okay. It's like a flying horse, if you if you like, you know,
it's a mythological object. Yes, like there's plenty of fiction that's interesting, but we're trying to
describe the non-fictional world, the actual world. Right. You as when you're doing conceptual work,
you can sort of choose the world. In mathematics, you can sort of create the world you want to
work in, want to do research. And you sort of postulate and create a situation that then you
explore. Now, which some mathematicians say, well, that means we're more fortunate than physicists who
have to worry about the physical world, which may not be as beautiful as imagined worlds. But in fact,
with superstring theory, the physicists don't care anymore about whether it applies to this world,
you know, 22 dimensions, remember all of that 26? Yeah. And it's certainly beautiful mathematics,
whether it's physics. You know, I knew a guy Brian Green, I helped him to get a summer job at IBM,
because people told me he was brilliant, and he was. And when I heard that he had gotten a
professorship at Columbia, it was described to me like this. It was a joint professorship between
the physics and the math department, because the math department thought what he was doing was physics,
and the physics department thought that he was doing was math. And the answer is, it's neither.
Interesting. Brian Green, super string theory. Well, anyway, he's published books on on that topic.
Yes, I've spoken to him on the podcast. Yeah, he has his what does he call it the
World Science Fair or something in New York? Correct.
But he and his partner who is from TV world, organized a they they had me on a panel once with
Marvin Minsky, not that long before his death, and some other interesting people. Oh, and Rebecca
Goldstein was on the panel also. Yes, I also interviewed Rebecca. Oh, did you?
Yeah, about Gödel's incompleteness theorem. My first question was, I believe something like,
tell me about Gödel's incompleteness theorems. And then she was like, Oh, that's insightful of you to
say theorems, because most people just think there's one. Yeah, I think the first is more significant,
at least for my work. But Rebecca in her book says something more important that she considers
Gödel a philosopher, not a mathematician. He published very few papers because he only wanted
to publish work that was philosophically significant. For a mathematician, his output was small.
But for a philosopher, it wasn't. But he was a philosopher who didn't want it. He was very shy. He
wanted to avoid controversies. And philosophy is only controversy. As I'm sure you've noticed,
with the different opinions on your podcast, a lot of his nicest essays were only published
posthumously. You know, he would do version after version, even correct the proofs, and not authorize
being published. So what, so Gödel only published philosophical papers for which he had mathematical
proofs. And therefore, they couldn't be, there could be no argument about whether the result was
was correct or not. But you could still argue about what its meaning was. And people still do.
Yeah, Rebecca has a nice book on Gödel's incompleteness. I once was
in a castle in a Schloss somewhere or other at a small dinner with Rebecca's ex-husband.
He's a physicist who's worked on Bohmian physics. That's physics with hidden variables.
Right.
Well, it's a personal joke. I shouldn't repeat it.
But I actually rather liked Rebecca's book, not only her book on Gödel,
a little book on Gödel, she has a novel that, that I like called The Mind-Body Problem.
She wrote a book about Spinoza, but it's not fiction. The Mind-Body Problem is fiction,
Rebecca Goldstein. And that was, you know, for a while, one test I would have with every,
every young lady that I hoped might turn into a girlfriend, this was a long time ago,
would be to give her, the candidate, a copy of Rebecca Goldstein's book and see what impression it
made. This was not a, this was, as you can imagine, not a good, not a good way to seduce or...
Well, it was a filtering mechanism for you.
Yeah, it was no good as a filtering mechanism, but I tried a few times. It never, it never,
it never worked as I expected. She had a nice little biography of Spinoza. I thought, uh,
it nice, what makes it nice is it is short and non-technical. Ditto with Gödel.
To be clear for people who want to know the math, the Gödel sentence asserts its own
unprovability in a consistent formal system. So it's written on screen here, and it basically means,
if this statement is true, then it asserts that it's not provable. So, hence, it's not provable.
And if it's false, well then, the negation of it is true, and therefore it must be provable.
However, it's asserting that the G sentence itself must be provable, thus we have inconsistency.
Now this fact, although seemingly obscure and arcane, is something that mathematicians,
philosophers, and even physicists are still reeling from almost 100 years later. It means our formal
knowledge will always be incomplete. There will always be facts out of reach by what even our most
well-defined science can capture. She did a number of works of fiction. The one that resonated with me
was the mind-body problem. Talking about the funny kinds of people who want to do fundamental research
in math or in physics. But the problem with the mind-body problem is it deals with the mathematician
who was precocious, was a child prodigy, and had done some great work. And somehow the magic stopped.
The magic stopped. And he couldn't have any new ideas. And this sort of upset me, because I had some of
my best ideas when I was a teenager. And I wondered, is this it? Is it over? Will I ever have another good
idea in my life? And her book was very dramatic. This young lady who was interested in philosophy
married this famous mathematician only to discover that he considered himself a failure, because since
since just before he married her, he hadn't had any new ideas from that point on, you know,
and it ruined their marriage, as you might imagine. So this is like a writer staring at a blank piece of
paper, right? Or sitting at the typewriter. And so that's a problem with creativity. You know, magic has
to strike. You wonder, will you get a new idea? And they don't come all the time. But I think I've been
fairly lucky. So in your case, did you feel like you've lost your creativity? Did no new ideas occur
to you in your adulthood? No, I don't think that's the case. You know, as my wife Virginia points out,
very often, even in public talks, I say, that's it. You know, I passed the torch to you young people,
go ahead. I don't think I'll come up with any new ideas. And that's not what happens, actually.
Do you think it's the case that as you age, that the amount of new novel ideas that are fruitful tend
to become less and less? Or is it that you become a harsher critic? So just as many new ideas occur to you,
but you shut them down in your own head. Whereas when you were younger, you had the conviction to
follow an idea. And even if you were older, if you were to follow one of those ideas that got hammered
down, it would have produced something. Yeah, well, what you're saying is pretty, it's pretty good.
I think it's really a question. Of course, if you study too much, and you get immersed in the current
paradigm, and you learn too much about it, then you're trapped. You become an expert in the current
paradigm, and then you're in a prison. But it's really a question of personality, it seems to me.
The kind of person who goes against the current and comes up with new ideas, that personality is not
going to change with age. You have to be unconventional, you have to not care what other
people think, and be willing to go out on a limb. You know, I have my definition of genius.
You see, to be a genius, you've got to be crazy. You've got to be crazy, because you have to
back a new idea at a time when there isn't enough evidence. If there were a lot of evidence,
everybody would believe in it, and it wouldn't be a new idea. So you're going out on a limb,
you're all by yourself there. And if you're lucky, the new idea is correct, and you're a genius. And if
not, you're just a crazy person, an eccentric, who didn't amount to anything. So I think I've been
lucky. I think Stephen Wolfram has been lucky. But there are people who don't like the work we've done.
The establishment doesn't like the work we've done. But I think no one can deny that Stephen and I are
not following the fashion. We are doing a body of work that doesn't follow the fashion. And I think
that's a good in itself, because I think we are an example that it is possible, even in our current
very heavily controlled research environment, very bureaucratic, only concerned with money,
progress reports, deliverables, milestones, grant requests, even in our current very in-hospital
environment for creativity. It is possible not to, you can't be against the system, but you can sort of
go outside the system, you know, go around the system. Stephen did it by creating his own company,
and he's a genius that funds his research. Very few people can do that, obviously. And I did it
by having a day job, which was, I was good at software engineering. And my night job,
actually, it wasn't my night job was fundamental research. IBM was happy to at that time was happy
to let me spend some of my time doing research. If I was doing something useful for the company. Now,
that was a period long ago. And I think now it's considered unacceptable that the stockholders will
burn you alive if you let employees do that. But at that time, IBM was the only,
was the computer company in the world, you know, and they had the luxury of letting some,
allowing some blue sky research, some done by their, their researchers. So when I was at the
Watson Research Center, it was, it was delightful, but I understand now that it's considered that
everything has to be, everything has to be useful. And in fact, I think the way the research, I don't
know, I haven't been in touch with them for a long time. But the way the research division was starting
to operate when I, when I left, when I retired from IBM, was that you had to get external funding for
a project. In the days when IBM was very prosperous, the corporation paid for the whole budget of the
research division. And we had a lot of freedom, it was, it was a golden sandbox, as they used to call it.
But at the end, to do a project, you had to find a product division that was willing to invest money,
basically, so that you would help them develop a new product, or maybe it was the US government.
And most of the money had to come from outside the corporation. And what that means is basically,
you're a hired gun. It's not curiosity driven research, you're doing things, you're prostituting
yourself, doing things that other people want, for practical purposes, instead of following your
dreams, or your curiosity, which is the best thing for doing research. Or, you know, IBM research had
some people doing fundamental physics when I was there, blue, totally blue sky basic research. But
there were also people who were doing technology projects, which was great fun, I was on such a
project. And it's great fun to create a new computer with a new operating system, new compiler, the whole
thing from scratch. It's like having a child, because it works, you can use it afterwards. But the
problem then is selling it to the corporation, and a new product, a new kind of computer based on new
ideas, competes with the existing product line. And you can't predict how well it'll sell. And so,
people called the IBM research a golden sandbox, because we came up with a new way of building a
computer and new software, new everything. And the corporation really didn't want to pursue it as a
product. But by paying us salaries and letting us do that, they made sure we didn't go to a startup
that would have competed with IBM. There was a genius there, who he would go around telling people his
ideas for new computer architectures, just to make sure that his ideas weren't totally squelched.
So innovation is a tough business, and you've got to be a little crazy to do it, because you're
fighting the system. What if someone says, look, you can be outside the system, and you can make a
contribution, but that's no guarantee. It may not even be a necessary condition. It's certainly not
sufficient. But let's say, we think it's necessary, then someone points out examples where, well, we have
ADS-CFT. That came from inside. What is that? I'm sorry, I'm not familiar with it. From the
holographic duality, ADS-CFT. Ah, yes. Conformal field theory. Well, that's very pretty, but it
doesn't apply to this world. Yes, right. The point is that it's an innovation, and it also has
applications in condensed matter physics. That has implication in the real world. And then also,
then there's quantum computing and quantum error-correcting codes. So those are inside
the academy. And earlier, you argued that certain mathematical results may not have a direct
application in our physical world, but they could be relevant in some, say, mathematical realm. And if
we accept that as a premise, then the critique that, hey, it doesn't apply to the real world,
that loses its force.
Well, that's a controversial topic, especially because I knew some of the people who created
quantum computing. I regard that as technology, not as fundamental innovation. But it's true,
the reformulation of quantum mechanics in terms of qubits, it's the same old quantum mechanics from the
1920s. But it feels and looks rather different when you do quantum mechanics in terms of qubits and
quantum computing. So that has been, I agree, that has been something. But I want more than that,
because you see, it's just the reformulization of 1920s quantum mechanics.
At this point, you may be wondering, like myself, why Greg continually puts the 1920s as the latest
revolution in physics. I emailed Greg afterward, saying, Dear Gregory, in our talk, you mentioned
that the foundations haven't changed since the 1920s. However, in the 1950s, 60s, and 70s,
there were significant developments, such as electroweak unification, confinement, and QED.
Did you mean to say that there has been no new innovation since the 1970s?
Greg then responded, and I have permission to use his voice here.
You have a right to disagree, of course, but seen from a vast distance,
the basic quantum framework, the real revolution, was the 1920s. At least that's how I see it. To me,
the topics you mention are just details. Best, Greg.
It's just the reformulization of 1920s quantum mechanics. It's clothed in a different way, but
there is no fundamentally new phenomenon there. You want to poke reality and get it to squeak.
It's not easy to find an experiment where nature shows
some new phenomenon that you never imagined before, and then it's tough to convince people that the
experiment isn't flawed, doesn't suffer from noise or other problems, and to get it published is tough.
If there isn't a theory that accounts for it. Listen, I agree. I'm a contrarian. I'm a romantic.
I don't believe in big science, but there are things that big science has accomplished and that the
current system has accomplished. By the way, the person who did that work that you mentioned,
whatever it was, I think he was in Argentina. Is it Maldacena or something?
Yes, right. Exactly.
Who's now at the Institute for Advanced Studies, but he studied in the physics department
where I had friends long ago when I was teaching at the University of Buenos Aires many, many years ago.
Another thing I don't like the system. It's like a giant prison, frankly, and young researchers are,
they can't get married. They can't have children. They can't have new ideas. They keep, they have to
keep publishing. They don't, they don't earn any money. They have to keep moving from institution to
institution, constantly publishing papers, very often fairly trivial papers with only small incremental
advances. I think, I think that's ridiculous. Another aspect of the system is writing books doesn't
count. You know, another thing is I knew a professor in Argentina. There was a professor who was a
wonderful teacher of mathematics. The students loved him. He created a whole school, but he wasn't a
researcher. He wrote beautiful books on the history of mathematics. So forcing everybody to constantly be
publishing a stream of research papers is ridiculous. I think if somebody is a wonderful teacher, that's
a contribution, you know, and the current system publisher perish, I think is ridiculous. And the
result is that we're publishing a lot of trivial stuff, you know, that it's not worth the trouble to try
to read. I think small is beautiful and there ought to be more freedom and more imagination and they've
taken the fun out of it. As Einstein said about doing research, you have to do it from
curiosity or, you know, or from love. If you're forced to do research, it's like forcing a wolf to
eat a steak. Yes, a wolf is very hungry and loves steak. But if you keep constantly forcing the wolf to eat
steak, it won't want, you know, it's going to get sick of it. So this business of forcing people to produce a
constant stream of relatively unimportant research. So they can't stop to change fields or to try anything
really risky because it might lead to a hiccup in the stream of constant publications.
I think this is all bad. And basically, they've taken the fun out of it. You know, what's the point?
I wouldn't want to be a researcher in the current environment.
I'm a rebel. I want to be creative. I want to have fun. If it's not fun, it means you shouldn't be doing
it. You know, Elon Musk says, why do you wake up in the morning if it's just solving problems? But if you
say, we're going to get to Mars, that's a challenge that can excite your imagination and make you feel
it's worth something. But the current system, I don't know, I feel it's sort of gruesome. It's sort
of like a prison. And I don't like it. But amazingly enough, some young people manage to do good work in
this horrendous environment. I admire them greatly, but I couldn't do it, is all I can say.
Greg, do you have a way of differentiating which philosophers will give you insight into something
mathematical or physical? So for instance, Kant may give rise to something physical or mathematical,
but it's less clear to me that Tolstoy has some claim on the Church-Turing thesis, for instance.
Well, Tolstoy doesn't.
Yes, right. So is there some way that you can look at, so you can look at Leibniz and say,
okay, well, let me read the philosophy of Leibniz. That may inspire me mathematically.
Well, it did.
Yes. Yeah. Is there some criteria that you have to a priori sort out which philosophers are more
likely to give you ideas?
Yes. I resonate with fundamental new ideas. I was good as a young student. I had piles of books
and I wouldn't read the book from cover to cover. I could very quickly see if there was a new idea in
it or if it was more of the same, warmed up soup. So I have this feeling for when there's a gem there,
a new idea. Now, you were talking about this business of publish or perish shows how bad the
current system is. Another thing that shows how rotten the current system is, is shut up and calculate.
Right. You said that that was suicidal and I'd like you to explain why.
Intellectually suicidal. Well, if you read about Einstein and his life, or you look at Schrodinger,
these, Einstein, all these people, von Neumann, all these people knew philosophy. It was part of the
German-speaking cultural world. They read philosophy and just being good at doing meaningless calculations.
I mean, yes, that's a talent, but you've got to think about what you're doing and you've got to ask,
is this the only way? Could there be another approach? Am I really asking the right question?
For example, Einstein's, his reaction to the particle physics, you know, the zoo of all the different
particles, hundreds of particles, depends what how you define particle, right? Some very briefly. He
said he just wanted to understand the electron, really understand the electron. The electron is
problematical. It's a singularity. And it's problematical in classical physics, and it's
problematical in quantum physics. Because if the electron is a point, there's infinite energy in
the field around the electron, according to classical Maxwellian electromagnetics. And in quantum mechanics
also, it doesn't solve the problem, you know? So there's also the question of, if you say the electron
is a little sphere, then it's going faster than the speed of light, it's rotating faster than the
speed of light, it turns out. So whatever you, if you say it's a point, you get into trouble. If you
say it's a rotating sphere, there were things called Poincaré forces having to do with electrons or spheres
that didn't work out. So guess what? Physicists don't ask this question anymore, because they know that
nobody has an answer. So you ask the questions where it's safe, where you can do calculations that
are meaningful. And you avoid the questions which give you infinities, you know, series that don't
converge. But technically, that means your theory is inconsistent or incomplete, right? So the way it
works is you just don't ask the questions that get you in trouble. But those are the, those are the
interesting questions, actually, the questions that get you in trouble, in my opinion. This is why
Einstein just said, all I want to understand is the electron, really understand the electron. And he had
no interest in, in, in the particle zoo, he called it. Now, Marie Guilman had a completely different
kind of mind from Einstein. I, I had the misfortune of meeting him, a good fortune or misfortune. The
first thing he does when you meet him is he tells you what language your name comes from and what it,
it really means. You know, he knows dozens of languages. He has an encyclopedic mind. And this
was the kind of mind that could deal with the particles. So I had no idea where my name came from.
I then went to my dad and said, Is this, is this correct? What he told me? My dad said, Yeah, as a
matter of fact, actually, it is. So, so it's a completely different kind of mind. Einstein was only
interested in very deep questions, deep question like, Is the physical objects continuous? Or are they
discrete? And his own attitude to his own work was, Well, it's alternative, you know, it's alternative,
we'll see how much survives in the physics of the future. He didn't take it that seriously,
you know. So when you make a religion out of the current theories, then you're never going to come
up with a new theory. So it's important to, to break the rules or to how do you say the an iconoclast,
you have to be willing to do that to find something new.
And it could be that, you know, some people have been trying that they're saying there is no dark
matter, it's the equations for gravity are wrong. That's a possibility, right? Modified, what is it?
M-O-N-D Newtonian dynamics, for example, there are different versions of this, correct, you know,
but they're all very ad hoc. And, you know, you, you ask yourself, how can they be justified?
And now there are ideas like the universe is built out of information, which are very provocative,
and quantum that I believed in for a long time, as an interesting topic for research, and quantum
information theory and quantum computation is a major step in that direction, in my opinion.
But it's, is that, does that mean that all of physical reality is information? Is consciousness
information? You know, I've tried to see how far I could take that, that point of view.
So you've got to be willing to go out on a limb and try new ideas, but the funding agencies will
never give you a grant for something. What would be meant by consciousness as information?
Well, you can measure consciousness in terms of information, saying how much information are you
conscious of? And so you can use measures of information as a way of measuring the amount
of consciousness. I don't know. You know, there's a nice book by David Chalmers, The Conscious Mind is
in Search of a Fundamental Theory. This was, maybe it's 20 years ago. And he has a whole chapter on
information theory. I think that's a very provocative book. You know, maybe in 200 years, we'll understand
more about such topics, you know. But for now, they're pretty elusive. But if you just stick to
stuff we know how to do, you're never going to find anything new. So one has to think out of the box,
I think. It helps if you're independently wealthy, because if you've got to get research grants to
survive and not starve to death, you're going to have to do, you're going to have to dance to the tune
of the piper, right? You're not going to be able to do what you want. So the way Stephen Wolf
himself that is he made his own very successful company. So he can now get the problem with that
is I've known some people who've done that, but then they had no time left to do their research,
right? They said, I'm leaving academia, I'm going to make my own company and make money,
and then I can do with that money all the research I want. Well, they managed to do the first step,
but it's a full-time job. They never got back to doing research. Stephen is unusual in that he did
get back to doing fundamental research. Well, this can't be the solution for everyone.
No, it can't be. So for the young person who's watching,
who wants to go into the universities or wants to contribute something large,
something innovative, what is the advice? My advice would be follow your curiosity,
pay no attention to what's fashionable. You know, at the end of your life, you'll say,
what did I do with my life? You tried and maybe succeeded a little bit in doing something new.
If you just follow the current fashion, it doesn't matter whether you succeed or not,
you've really accomplished very little with your life. So it's a question of what do you find
meaningful? I would tell them, fight the system, but you can't fight the system. It's bigger than
we are, right? What you can try to do is ignore the system. So one way is to do your research as a
hobby and, you know, make pizzas or something as a living. Max Stegmark, I know, had a steady stream of
sort of routine astrophysical papers, good papers, dealing with analyzing large quantities of
astronomical data, good stuff. And then he had the papers that may have been closer to his heart,
which were very speculative, like the question of a multiverse of all possible mathematical laws.
You know, that's an extreme multiverse. But he was doing solid work. So you have to have enough energy
to do both things at the same time. When you're young, it is possible. It is possible to do more
routine work to survive or be a computer program or program or have some other way of earning a living
and then have your art. You know, there are a lot of amateur musicians who are very good.
Sometimes for a musician, it's very tough to survive financially. I knew one musician, he had various
church choirs that he directed, he would tutor people who wanted piano classes. It's not easy when
when you go off in your own direction. But I think a life like that is, well, if you believe in dharma,
I don't know, some of us feel a need to do this kind of thing. We don't want to be just, how do you see,
cogs in the machine, or just like soldiers following orders. But it's, it's tough, you have
to be lucky to get away with it, right. And the fact that you're unconventional doesn't mean you're
going to make great art, or you're going to discover a new kind of physics. But at least you give it a try.
You know, and I think, I think that is something that one can be proud of that one gave it a shot,
whether or not one succeeds. I mean, there is this old statement that if you, if you have an
unambitious research project, you may succeed and solve it, but so what? If you have an extremely
ambitious research project, you may never solve it. But you're bound to find interesting things
along the way. Great. Professor, do you have any advice for myself? I have this channel here,
I want to contribute to the field, I don't want it to just be where I'm speaking to someone and then
passively some information is conveyed. And maybe there are some nuggets here and there that creep up from
the conversation and that spurs some research. So that's already happened. A tiny modicum in your case
with the extended evolutionary synthesis, and Tim Maudlin and there are a variety of other examples. But I want
to actively contribute more to research using this, not just this podcast, but this whole channel, this whole
project, this whole theories of everything project that I have. So what advice do you have?
Well, you're making a valuable contribution. You know, people in the system can't even write books,
because you don't get credit for writing a book. You only get credit for writing refereed papers
in high impact journals. Writing a book is a hobby. People used to write books. Wonderful mathematicians
of physicists used to write books. And nowadays, you get no credit for it. You may do it anyway,
because you have nothing better to do, you know, at the end of your career. Anyway, I think you're
contributing, because you're getting people to question the received wisdom, right? You are interviewing
some unconventional people, not just the standard bearers. You're also interviewing them. Your survey of
super string theory, I'm sure was a lot of hard work, and it means you understand a lot of physics.
And that's, that's valuable, too, because some young person may look at that and say, Oh, this is
super string theory. Do I want to take the trouble to learn this and work in this area? Is this what
excites me, excites my imagination? Do I want to spend my life on this? And by giving them a overview of the
whole field, which nobody does, in an understandable way, you're helping young people to decide what am I
going to do with my life, you've got to make this decision, in my opinion, you, it helps to make
decisions, what am I going to do with my life in high school, actually? Because that's about the after
that you start going, you know, on the rails in different directions already, you have much less
freedom. High school, Stephen and Wolfram and I were saying to each other, is maybe the last time
that people still have open minds, and maybe it can be influenced. So, so I'm sure a lot of the people
that look at your stuff are not established scientists. They know what they want to do,
they know their area, they're not going to waste the time. So I suspect that the people
are looking at your podcast are younger people, outsiders, who, some of them are outsiders, but
you have to be pretty interested to go through your thing on super strength. You have to have a pretty
great curiosity for physics. So I suspect that a lot of the people who are looking at your stuff are
young people who are trying to decide what to do with their lives, what is the area that
they feel they can contribute to that they believe has some beauty, or some
that they resonate with for some reason, depending on their personality, you know, people are born with
personalities. My two children, one of each one of them is very different from the other, you know, so I was
doing crazy research as a child already. And as a teenager, I was already coming up with definitions of
randomness and stuff and complexity. So each person has different talents. And, you know, as somebody said, you
can't know if you like pea soup, if you've never tried pea soup. So you're giving people a chance to
see different things out there, and maybe decide what to do with their lives. So I think that's a
valuable contribution. And so I would say, keep it up if you can survive financially like this. So, so I
think what you're doing is splendid. And it's going to help. It's going to help some young people to decide
what they're what they want to do with their lives, which is a very important decision. And you've got to
make it as young as possible. So I would say, congratulations, and keep up the good work is what I
would say. Professor, thank you for inviting me to the Institute for Advanced Studies. That was an honor.
And it was great to see you in person and to meet Rafael and a slew of other wonderful people.
Thanks very much, Kurt. Take care. Also, thank you to our partner, The Economist.
Firstly, thank you for watching. Thank you for listening. There's now a website,
curtjaimungal.org, and that has a mailing list. The reason being that large platforms like YouTube,
like Patreon, they can disable you for whatever reason, whenever they like. That's just part of
the terms of service. Now, a direct mailing list ensures that I have an untrammeled communication
with you. Plus, soon I'll be releasing a one-page PDF of my top 10 toes. It's not as Quentin Tarantino
as it sounds like. Secondly, if you haven't subscribed or clicked that like button, now is
the time to do so. Why? Because each subscribe, each like helps YouTube push this content to more
people like yourself. Plus, it helps out Kurt directly, AKA me. I also found out last year that
external links count plenty toward the algorithm, which means that whenever you share on Twitter,
say on Facebook, or even on Reddit, etc., it shows YouTube, hey, people are talking about this
content outside of YouTube, which in turn greatly aids the distribution on YouTube.
Thirdly, there's a remarkably active discord and subreddit for theories of everything where people
explicate toes, they disagree respectfully about theories, and build as a community our own toe.
Links to both are in the description. Fourthly, you should know this podcast is on iTunes,
it's on Spotify, it's on all of the audio platforms. All you have to do is type in theories
of everything and you'll find it. Personally, I gain from rewatching lectures and podcasts.
I also read in the comments that, hey, toe listeners also gain from replaying. So how
about instead you re-listen on those platforms like iTunes, Spotify, Google Podcasts, whichever
podcast catcher you use. And finally, if you'd like to support more conversations like this,
more content like this, then do consider visiting patreon.com slash Kurt J. Mungle
and donating with whatever you like. There's also PayPal. There's also crypto. There's also just
joining on YouTube. Again, keep in mind, it's support from the sponsors and you that allow me
to work on toe full time. You also get early access to ad free episodes, whether it's audio or video.
It's audio in the case of Patreon video in the case of YouTube. For instance, this episode that
you're listening to right now was released a few days earlier. Every dollar helps far more than you
think. Either way, your viewership is generosity enough. Thank you so much.
