Today's video is brought to you all by you.
Yeah, you, and everyone over on Patreon and our website.
With YouTube not having the greatest environment for small to mid-sized creators,
this channel is primarily viewer-funded, and I couldn't do any of this without your support.
If you want to see early access, exclusive content, and podcasts,
consider supporting for just a few dollars a month.
Now, let's get on to the video.
Philip K. Dick is undoubtedly one of the most recognizable writers in science and speculative fiction.
The mind behind films such as Blade Runner, Minority Report, and Man in the High Castle.
Yet, like many authors, much of his philosophical backdrop can feel quite veiled.
Mix this with Philip K. Dick's novels being translated into popular visual mediums,
it can be a bit confusing as to what Philip K. Dick is really honing in on.
Nonetheless, how we can adequately describe his literature.
Obviously, authors are multivaried.
There are numerous things on the table they are trying to elaborate on.
But I would argue there is nothing more present in Philip K. Dick's novels than existentialism.
Matter of fact, I don't think there is a fictional author I have read that more adequately poses the questions of explicit existentialism.
Philip K. Dick is undoubtedly one of my favorite authors.
A Scanner Darkly, Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep, and Ubik being among some of my most favorite novels.
And his literature alone isn't enough.
Blade Runner, particularly Denis Villeneuve's sequel, is arguably my favorite film of all time.
But none of this, nor so much media people love, would exist without this guy.
And his literary endeavors into the self, humanity, and our interaction with technology.
But before we get into the core analysis, Philip K. Dick has published a lot.
Because of this, I am only able to cover a select few for the sake of time.
We should also start this video out on Philip K. Dick as a person, as it's difficult to separate the art from the artist.
We should talk about who Philip K. Dick was and his story.
Buckle up though, this gets weird really fast, but deeply informs how we can contextualize his work in the vein of existentialist philosophy.
Philip K. Dick grew up in San Francisco.
While there isn't much detail surrounding his childhood, what is known is that it was quite rough.
He lost his twin sister due to malnutrition and neglect from his parents.
Those same parents divorced once he was five.
And the consensus is, much of his childhood was unhappy.
Yet, even as a child, he began to write.
He did so all the way through adolescence, graduating from Berkeley High School, alongside other science fiction author, Yersala Le Guin, despite them not knowing each other at all.
After this, he went to the University of California and quickly dropped out to work at a music store, citing anxiety issues and a feeling of alienation throughout academia.
This is where his writing took off, particularly after writing The Man in the High Castle.
Dick wrote numerous short stories and novels that were incredibly successful.
Yet, his life was quite tumultuous throughout this time.
He couldn't hold down relationships, and during the time of heightened McCarthyism, like many artists, he was visited from the FBI due to supposed pro-communist activity.
Throughout this time, he married and remarried five different times, with each marriage containing pretty violent relationship dynamics, and maintained estranged relationships with his children.
Towards the 70s, Dick claimed to experience numerous paranormal instances.
While he maintained these experiences were genuine and truly external, these experiences frequently occurred after the use of drugs.
He also claimed to have seen geometric patterns that grew into the visual form of Jesus in ancient Rome.
He also said that he received a delivery of opiates at his front door by a strange woman after recovering from dental surgery.
Towards the end of his life, these, what we can likely call delusions, only grew, and he became increasingly paranoid and often conspiratorial.
I've seen my CIA file. I've seen my FBI file. Under the America's Freedom of Information Act, I was legally allowed to see both files.
The CIA opened my mail. The FBI had a file on me. I've seen both.
It depends a little on what you mean by paranoia. If you mean a psychotic conviction that you were being persecuted, which is not in accord with reality, I don't think I had that.
But boy, I sure thought the cops were watching everything I did. And I was correct.
My audience will love this one. In 1974, he even wrote a letter to the FBI claiming numerous professors, including Frederick Jameson, a frequent philosopher on this channel, were spies and foreign agents of the Soviet Union and their satellite states.
Dick would later pass away in 1982 after a stroke at the age of 53.
Now, we stated earlier Philip K. Dick might be one of the most interesting authors that grapples with the questions of existentialism, particularly in today's context.
So, we should start there. Crudely put, existentialism is a philosophical framework or field that is concerned and contends with the various phenomenon we grapple with as humans.
Our struggles, confusions, alienation, and desires.
Soren Kierkegaard, a Dutch philosopher in the 1800s, was one of the first thinkers who started to solidify existentialism as a philosophical category altogether.
Kierkegaard was concerned with our human condition towards angst, despair, and even our relationship with death.
To Kierkegaard, the infinity we are presented with in life, the freedom to choose, is a dizzying experience.
Some of the most painful experiences in our lives is the negation of restrictions, rather than the restrictions themselves.
Matter of fact, Kierkegaard posits our entire psychology, even consciousness, is an internal conflict of grappling with the infinite.
We'll get deeper into existentialism, but in my mind, time is always in the backdrop of Dick's novels.
Obviously, all stories and plot maintain time and pacing as to make sense, unless you're William Faulkner or something.
But in Dick's writing, there's this extreme narrative, focus towards time, and how one interacts and grapples with it.
Alright, let's start out with the actual analysis.
I will add, I will not contain spoilers.
As other videos on media, I will keep the plot and the core story clear so that you may enjoy them yourself.
The existential relationship with self, subjectivity, and time is especially highlighted in Ubik,
a novel where corporations have colonized the moon amidst campaigns and conflict of corporate espionage, akin to a private cold war.
In the novel, there's a specific product called Ubik that appears as an aerosol spray that can reverse biological deterioration.
Because time is so present here, this might also be Philip K. Dick's most metaphysical novel.
Philip K. Dick, and by extension, Ubik, is concerned with how we delineate truth between our subjective experience and objective, scientific truth,
or rather, our ability or inability to truly separate the two.
There's a common interpretation that Ubik itself is a metaphor of God.
Ubik, as a spray, saturates.
It's in the air.
You can breathe it.
It falls on material.
In this sense, Ubik sustains life within the book.
Yet, I see some things here that are rarely attributed to this book that catches my eye.
It seems the book shows what happens when humans try to become or play God.
What happens when you purchase God outright?
What happens when we commodify God himself?
This echoes to the current American cultural climate around religion.
Some of the last bastions of popularized Christianity has been megachurches that rake in billions.
Selling salvation where people can purchase agency, meaning, promises of a better world.
Regarding Ubik and its relation to time and metaphysics, and commodification of God, we might posit this question.
In our own world, or individuals in the Lakewood Church, wouldn't Joel Osteen be more of God than God himself?
And in the world of Ubik, wouldn't that apply to the creator of Ubik aerosol spray?
I don't think it's an accident that in so many of Dick's novels, the basis of human organization is within the corporation.
There's a common backdrop of a world that we've increasingly abandoned anything outside of our immediate senses.
And it's difficult to parse what is real.
A world where metaphysics, and by extension, a type of universal ethic, is dead.
Perhaps Ubik's religious connotation, we might say Dick is making the point that God is dead.
Akin to the infamous and often misunderstood Nietzschean phrase of God is dead and we have killed him.
But not only is he dead, we killed the backdrop that allowed for him to exist at all.
That being metaphysics.
Primarily, the possibility of a metaphysics that exists outside of our immediate phenomenon.
Our day-to-day existence.
Metaphysics posits something that is beyond us.
Beyond consumption and production.
Time, for example, for the majority of human history, was akin to God.
Or attributed to a God literally.
Something we could recognize beyond ourselves.
More recently, we can describe time from the scientific, rationalist, and liberal approach that time has become space-time, as scientifically discovered by Albert Einstein.
A phenomenon we attribute to gravity.
But arguably, our most recent rendition of time, in a contemporary lens, is time is now money.
It's consumption.
It's sustainment.
It's the mechanism that allows me to prove to my pos that I signed in to my shift.
The death of metaphysics, and the death of God, combined with increasing poverty, and increasing sociology of mass consumption.
For so many, time has no bearing outside of self.
Outside of sustainment and production.
Our reality, being tied to our perception and experience, is something that Philip K. Dick actually said.
In an interview, he explicitly stated,
I don't believe that the universe exists.
I believe that the only thing that exists is God, and he is more than the universe.
The universe is an extension of God into space and time.
That's the premise I start from in my work.
That so-called reality is a mass delusion, and we've all been required to believe for reasons totally obscure.
Now, how might an analysis of poverty, ideals of hyper-consumerism, dissolution of ethics, further look in a literary world for Philip K. Dick?
Well, arguably, his most popular novel is a wonderful example.
That being, Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?
The story behind Blade Runner.
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep follows a bounty hunter named Rick Deckard,
who seeks to retire, really, just kill, escaped androids or humanoid robots owned by their creators.
This world exists in a post-nuclear war setting where nearly all animals were brought to extinction,
and the basis of human organization is through competing corporations.
From the get-go, Deckard wants to desperately buy a living, real, authentic animal.
Real animals are seen as a status symbol in this world, where the poor are delegated to only being able to afford robotic imitations of animals.
Hence the name, Electric Sheep.
One of the ways Deckard or other bounty hunters find real androids over real humans is administering an empathy test.
I think anyone can see the immediate dystopian setup here.
It seems like at every point, Philip K. Dick is sending a warning sign.
Deckard's job as a bounty hunter is to kill, under the tame language, retire, androids that are property of a corporation that invested large sums of capital in its creation.
There's a moral purity to killing androids, given that there is a standard that these androids don't feel empathy.
Something we find throughout the novel that isn't completely true.
And yet, Deckard finds himself questioning things.
I'll leave it at that.
The immediate philosophy attributed to Blade Runner and do androids dream of electric sheep is the foundational question of what it means to be human.
And I think that's accurate.
Personhood is important here.
But it's much more than that.
There's the question of being, of life.
It's not just about the alienation of us, but alienation from life itself.
What's our relationship with animals in the earth?
How do we source our food?
How do we parse our history of eugenics?
In a contemporary lens, how do we parse factory farming of animals?
Are these beings that we eat every day capable of things we didn't initially realize?
Specifically in the vein of existentialism, there seems to be a stark realization throughout numerous Philip K. Dick novels that we as people only exist in so much as we relate to others.
That we can't really separate ourselves from the earth, from animals, from life in general.
If reality, a consensus on what is, isn't clear, isn't the only referent or connection to the world around us.
A lot of the ethical questions posited from Dick's writing is seen within Martin Heidegger.
Particularly his work, The Question Concerning Technology, which we've done a video on.
Link above.
Heidegger, when writing from the mid-20th century, saw technology produced a disposition upon us.
The initial goal of technology was to build upon the past.
To help discover something new.
What Heidegger fears is that, instead of building, technology has started to inframe us.
Trap us, in a sense.
The threat to man does not come in the first instance from the potentially lethal machines and apparatus of technology.
The actual threat has already affected man in his essence.
The rule of inframing threatens man with the possibility that it could be denied to him to enter into a more original, revealing, and hence, to experience the call of a more primal truth.
Thus, where inframing reigns, there is danger in the highest sense.
I think Heidegger has a good way in describing the contradictory essence of technology.
An essence Philip K. Dick also stumbled upon.
I had a humanities professor once tell me that her biggest struggle when teaching classes were STEM students not being able to comprehend or excel in classes that are often considered easy.
Things such as the arts and humanities.
They could handle ludicrously high workloads in very abstract fields such as chemistry, physics, majors around pre-med and engineering.
But when it came down to writing or reading comprehension, critical thinking in an academic context, it was a real challenge.
I witnessed something similar as well.
During my first two years at a local community college I attended, one of the most difficult and notorious class wasn't really just organic chemistry, nor advanced physics or calculus.
It was literally an introduction into philosophy course.
But that class was structured around analytical philosophy.
It was genuinely one of the most basic classes by way of subject matter.
It was technically so simple, and yet it was genuinely difficult.
It was one of those classes that started with 30 people, and by the end of the semester there were around 15 left.
And I quite frankly didn't blame others for dropping it.
For so many 18 to 20 year olds, we aren't conditioned to critically think, which analytical philosophy does require.
And I fully believe that because our first 18 years of education is deeply entrenched within the ethic of instruction, a byproduct of this enframing, things as basic as introductory philosophy can be very difficult.
I think this is indicative of Heidegger's concern, and is indicative of his concept of enframing, or in German, forgive me here, gestel.
Technology influences our own thinking and instills its own type of ethic.
One that can create an existence where everyone and everything is a resource to be utilized, which Heidegger calls a standing reserve.
Thus, in contemporary education, we value things like engineering, computer science, business management, yet deeply undervalue interdisciplinary fields such as the arts and humanities, even social sciences.
The former examples are fields that can be utilized, used, create economic value in an abstract sense.
The process of enframing has thus skewed our world to value economic creation over human education.
Essentially, in an easy way to put it, whatever makes a few dudes really rich is what matters.
The backdrop to nearly every Philip K. Dick novel is embedded in a world where the cultural logic is this enframing, where our will has trapped us into a finite bubble where humanity cannot see beyond.
An existential and psychological form of technocracy.
In the film Blade Runner, there exist advertisements everywhere, and a dreary, trillion-dollar skyline that contrasts the relatively impoverished commons below.
Prostitution is common, and human companionship itself is a commodity in itself.
To me, Blade Runner, and by extension, do androids dream of electric sheep, is Heidegger's enframing materially realized.
What happens, though, when the process of technology, enframing, the loss of a world beyond ourselves leads to instability?
A reactionary mass rejection.
Well, in Philip K. Dick's lens, we can see something similar in The Man in the High Castle.
In this alternative history novel, the Axis powers won World War II.
Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan effectively control the world.
In this alternate timeline, Imperial Japan controls the western portion of the United States, and Nazi Germany controls the eastern portion.
And there is a current Cold War amidst these two superpowers.
Undeniably, the Allied loss during the time of World War II would have created a dystopian nightmare for many throughout Western Europe and the United States.
Really, around the globe, actually.
But, like many themes in media, literature and art that explores fascism often reveals the disturbing reality that the bedrock of it has always been present.
And it's here today.
I think Hannah Arendt's concept of what we could call the banality of evil works here.
The type of technocracy, or the fascism posited from The Man in the High Castle, is always an extension of us as people.
Characters like John Smith, a high-ranking Nazi official, embodies Arendt's idea that it's seemingly normal people who aid in perpetuating policy, or even all-out atrocities that hurt others.
It's not necessarily fanaticism itself that does this, and Arendt's, Eichmann, and Jerusalem Arendt states,
Good can be radical. Evil can never be radical. It can only be extreme.
For it possesses neither depth nor any demonic dimension yet.
And this is its horror.
It can spread like a fungus over the surface of the earth and lay waste to the entire world.
Evil comes from a failure to think.
The origins of fascism is extreme.
It's a reaction to political and economic failure tethered to a disdain for the other.
But that quote-unquote extremism isn't the mechanism that allows it to spread.
It's apathy, a creation of new norms centered around brutality and ignorance.
Perhaps materially, a society who fails to give its citizens the tools to think, or the proper mechanisms to democratically address issues.
Does this sound familiar?
At the time of writing this, this example may hit close to home.
But I think the points made from Man in the High Castle are most felt with direct, current examples.
Thus, this may even be uncomfortable and seem antagonistic to your own worldview.
But I hope you hear me out because it certainly does apply.
In our contemporary world, someone like Trump never gained power due to his core supporters.
Trump's core, passionate, unrelenting base didn't elect him.
American independence did.
A swing of 20 points towards Trump in terms of the margin from 9-point advantage four years ago with independence for Biden to now an 11-point advantage with independence for Trump in Georgia.
Now, there's reasonable debate about whether Trump, as a person, is what some could describe as an uppercase F fascist.
Given his non-traditional past, his friendship with Epstein, celebrities, and political elites, a vast history of promiscuity, there doesn't seem to be a cohesive ideology here.
If anything, there's just an unrelenting pursuit of self-interest.
That said, the administration, his cabinet, and system Trump is building absolutely is fascist.
Let's start with the easiest, lowest-hanging fruit.
We have this guy.
Elon Musk.
There's so much transparent content here, from dog whistles to some explicit statements around the Great Replacement conspiracy.
I'm not even going to spend too much time on him.
We know where he stands.
But as a cohesive Trump administration, on a very technical level, we're likely there.
We just recently witnessed a clearly unconstitutional executive order that states the judiciary cannot interpret laws regarding public agencies.
Only attorney generals and the executive branch.
Ironically, the same judiciary, months before, gave a Supreme Court ruling saying that a president is immune from all legal consequences
when executing an official act as president.
The Trump administration, with some internal pushback, has attempted to fire every FBI agent who was assigned to a federal investigation of January 6th,
despite the fact that FBI agents don't decide which case they are assigned to.
We saw the pardoning of January 6th rioters, many charged with violent crimes.
We've seen the mass hysteria and discrimination of immigrants, LGBTQ communities.
There's so much more here that we could add to this list,
but these are just some contemporary material policy examples that show the trajectory of the United States
integrating into a political program within the same logical vein of fascism.
From a centralization of power, dissolution of law, democratic procedure, and under a far-right nationalist lens.
For this reason, some people reasonably call this era of authoritarian politics, neo-fascism.
But the important point here is the advent of fascism can come from a slow dissolution of institutions.
The normalization of a polity that emphasizes brutality, in-groups, out-groups.
In many cases, it doesn't dramatically explode into overt dictatorship, nor does it need to.
It's a slow, gradual process.
And that's what makes it incredibly difficult for typically apathetic, busy, or disinterested people to spot.
I think what Philip K. Dick is able to do well is encapsulate how humans and our systems operate on a complete level.
We exist in progressive, cosmic senses.
We strive for more.
We can build skyscrapers, robots, types of artificial intelligence.
But how are these technological feats applied?
I think the legacy of someone like Philip K. Dick is best approached from the lens of caution.
A warning.
And I think analyzing Philip K. Dick from an existentialist lens allows us to parse the reality that we are individuals constantly tethered and engaged with systems around us.
I think particularly for people new to existentialism, it can be easy to see it as a framework, like we do in the Western world, where we are individuals first and foremost.
Isolated and separate from society, institutions, and politics.
But, in a sense, this couldn't be further from the truth.
We are people with hopes, dreams, agency.
But within that agency, navigating a complex web of things we don't fully understand.
The saying from Jean-Paul Sartre, an existentialist philosopher, rings true here.
Man is condemned to be free.
I think the dystopian backdrop to Philip K. Dick's novels highlights how decision, freedom, is a type of damnation that requires decent responsibility.
It's heavy.
It's often unbearable at times.
But above all, I think it's a gift.
In the same words of Sartre, there may be more beautiful times, but this one is ours.
Thank you all for watching and making it to the end.
Wanted to give an extra special shout-out to all the kind people over here on Patreon and our website.
You all make this possible.
And I want to give a particularly extra special shout-out to these Patreons in particular.
Jay Roberts, Kevin Hoop, and Cedric Wattman.
You all go above and beyond, and I truly appreciate it so much.
For everyone else, I'll see you in the next.
Thank you.
