We have an economy geared towards giving us, in your language, these little micro-liters of dopamine,
which creates cravings. It doesn't give you satisfaction.
Human interaction gives us a deep fulfillment of life.
And we have a crisis right now of loneliness and isolation
as we all work longer and longer hours to get more and more money to just buy more and more crap.
And there's an epidemic of anxiety and depression among the young generation
that's consuming on average twice as much as we did at their age.
And they're less happy.
So there's no empirical evidence that this pursuit of consumption actually does make us better off.
A few weeks ago, I released a frankly, the 10 myths still taught in business schools,
which covered some of the deepest held misconceptions underpinning economic theory.
Today, building off that episode, I am joined by a real economist,
Josh Farley, to dig deeper into these myths and share a few more of his own.
Josh Farley is a professor in community development and applied economics
and public administration at the University of Vermont.
Additionally, he is a fellow in the Gund Institute for the Environment.
Additionally, he was the chairman of my PhD committee back in the day.
Josh's current research focuses on the economics of essential resources,
the democratization of monetary and financial systems, the evolution of cooperation,
the economics of information, and the commons.
Every time I talk with Josh, I learn something new.
And this time was no exception.
We covered everything from the faulty way economics accounts for human behavior
to how complex systems theory and fractals might inform more accurate models in the future.
Ultimately, this episode was about clarifying the mismatch between our economic theories
and the way the world actually works.
But as Josh points out, if we're able to better understand the fundamentals,
perhaps we can begin to imagine and maybe implement a better economic system in the future.
If you are enjoying this podcast, I additionally invite you to subscribe to our Substack newsletter
where you can read more of the system science underpinning the human predicament,
where my team and I post special announcements related to our work on the great simplification.
You can find the link to subscribe in the show description.
With that, please welcome my friend and PhD advisor, Josh Farley.
Josh Farley, welcome back to the program.
Josh Farley, thanks, Nate. Always a pleasure.
This is your third or fourth time.
I'm not sure.
Would you believe, my friend, 20 years ago, this was my first semester of my PhD program
with you as my PhD chair.
Time flies.
Wow.
Time flies.
No shit.
We were so young.
And the things we're going to discuss today, the myths that are still taught in business schools
and economic classes around the world.
You and I were talking about most of these things 20 years ago.
So I don't know what that says about us or about the world or about the economic power structure
that serves the superorganism.
But I'm happy to have you back.
I've wanted to have you back for lots of reasons.
And this is a good topic.
You watched my recent, frankly, titled The 10 Myths Still Being Taught in Business Schools.
And I wanted to actually have a real economist, you, to help me kind of drill deep in these
myths and realities and why they're important.
So let's have that as an outline.
I'm just going to get started.
The first one, still taught in economics classes, is that humans are self-interested, rational,
consistent utility maximizers, also known as homo economicus.
So what is this myth?
And then ultimately, I'm going to ask you, what is the reality?
And why is the delta between the myth and reality important to our lives and our futures?
It's basically, it's a little bit even more than what you say.
So we're self-interested, we're insatiable, we're rational, and all our choices then,
it's very interesting in economics, they'll give you these fancy calculus problems
so you can figure out the optimal point.
And then supposedly, the actual consumer just goes in and does all that calculus in their
brains and forms the, you know, makes the optimal decisions.
And so there's, I mean, there's so many problems with this myth, I would say.
First of all, I would like to say that there is evidence that simply studying economics makes
people conform more to that myth.
So, and I watched my friends' kind of worldviews change during the PhD program to conform more
to that rational, you know, that rational analysis.
I look at things and feel free to interrupt me because I have a few things I would like to say here.
I look at things, I'm a, you know, really big on evolutionary theory and humans are among the most
social animals.
You cannot survive apart from the group.
So from an evolutionary perspective, the most rational thing you can do is to be part of a group.
And the more you're identified with a group, the more you can cooperate with others in that group,
trust others, and, you know, together achieve much more than individuals can.
And what identifies you more strongly as part of a group is many times believing crazy ideas that your
group also believes.
So it might be perfectly rational to believe totally crazy things if it shows that you are a member of
this group and you need this group to survive.
Like economists.
Like economists.
And, you know, and if you don't, I mean, you know, when I was doing my PhD, my advisors told me,
if you want to finish, you have to believe what, you have to write what we believe, not what you believe.
So there's, you know, it's been like five wasted years of my life.
Yeah, well, you told me the same thing when I was writing my PhD paper.
Yeah, I hope not.
So why is that, um, why is that fundamentally important that humans are not only self-interested,
but from an evolutionary perspective, we are other regarding.
So the other regarding that we care about what people think of us and we care about the welfare
of others, that's not in our system and it's not in our values, our prices, our incentives at all.
Right?
Yeah.
Right.
Not, it's not there.
It's not part of the pro, um, yeah.
Yeah.
It's totally outside the way we, uh, model our economy, but I'm going to take a little
bit of a step back here to go into the, you know, evolutionary ideas of why we depend so
much on each other.
And I'll start, this is a little bit of an aggression, but I'm going to start with this
idea of major evolutionary transitions, which is when two organisms become so interdependent,
they can only survive as a collective, no longer as single individuals.
And this is at the heart of all evolution that you and I are eukaryotes.
We have nuclei where all complex life has nuclei and the eukaryotic, uh, cell with a nucleus
was the merger of Archaeans and bacteria, two domains of life, more distinct from each other
than we are from mushrooms.
And these became so interdependent, they could only survive as a collective cell in which the
archaean provided the membrane and the, uh, bacteria provided the organelles, the mitochondria.
And then those first eukaryotic cells, uh, is individual cells came to become so interdependent
with each other.
They merged to form multicellular animals and those multicellular animals along certain
lineages became so interdependent.
They merged to become social animals.
And at any of these levels, if the, um, well, I should actually, I'll go first.
I'll talk about multi-level selection theory basically says that for any organism, the selfish
individual out-competes other individuals within a group, but the group with the fewest
selfish individuals out-competes other groups.
And what this means is that selfishness at one level undermines welfare at the next highest
level.
And you do not want your mitochondria to be selfish and proliferate in your cells.
You'll get like cellular disease and you'll die.
You do not want your cell to, uh, behave selfishly.
Um, in which case it would be a cancerous cell, you know, to the, to the, um, cost of your
body and is an individual who only focuses on their own self-interest will out-compete other
individuals, but at the expense of the group and what makes humans, we are probably the most
group centric species to ever evolve.
We can't survive a week apart from other humans and their technologies and ideas.
So if we have all the artifacts that were made by, you know, huge numbers of humans with knowledge
accumulated over, you know, a measurable time, we can survive for a brief time, but we are
absolutely dependent on each other.
So we have an economic system, which is modeled on the self-interest of the individual claiming
that that leads to the benefit of all.
And yet in evolutionary terms, um, the individuals that do that, they destroy the collective and the
relationship of the human individual to society should be the same as the relationship of the
individual cell to the human body.
So is, is the analog there like cancer cells per out-produce and they win, but they ultimately
kill the host, which is them, is them themselves.
Yep.
And so the, the deal is this, I find this so interesting that natural selection acts,
can act on the level of the selfish individual, in which case it's genetic selection, basically,
or it can act on the level of the group, which for humans is the cultural group.
And, uh, evolute culture evolves just like genes.
The, the problem is, is that in there's a time horizon, because what you're saying is
absolutely true in the intermediate and longer term, but in the short run power, those cultures
that maximize power are out-competing the more indigenous, wiser, slower cultures.
And that's what's happened.
Right, right.
And this is what happened.
So, and, and this goes at many scales.
So it's the, um, the culture that focuses on its own welfare over that of
others often harms humanity.
So the colonialist powers, the, um, you know, those who expand really rapidly through capitalism,
consuming all the planet's resources and spewing out these wastes and degrading the whole.
So it, again, it's this problem of the individual society that puts its interests ahead of other
societies tends to harm humanity.
And if this whole time, these species were evolving, they, each species was interacting
with the environment to create an environment.
So species evolved to be codependent on each other and no species can survive apart from
the ecosystem.
Any more than your cell can survive apart from your body.
So we have at least 10 myths to cover, so I don't want to go too far down this rabbit hole,
but I will, I will ask this, do people, do economists, do business school teachers and professors today
truly believe that humans are rational, consistent, insatiable economic calculators like homo economicus,
or is it just a hand wavy thing away to, uh, gather more power and status and credibility and, and money?
I mean, almost always the economist will acknowledge, well, this is just a simplification.
It's not really true, but if we act as if it is true, then that gives us a better insight into how
the economy works. And so if it's, if we can prove, and I think we can, that it's not true,
what does that tell us about our current state of the world and the future?
Yeah. So, um, I mean, it, it, it tells us that the only thing we can strive for,
the only thing that really matters is ever increasing consumption. So we have an economy
geared towards that. And in my view, what's happened is we have an economy geared towards
ever increasing consumption. We're insatiable for consumer goods is the idea. And we get only
pleasure from consuming. So we have an economy that is geared towards giving us in your language,
these little micro liters of dopamine, which does not, you know, uh, it creates cravings.
It doesn't give you a satisfaction. What really we have is, uh, we're deeply social animals.
And this is the reductionist approach. We have an economy geared towards, uh, dopamine fixes and
human interaction creates the, uh, a neurotransmitter of oxytocin, which is bonding with
friendship and sex and brotherhood and stimulates cooperation, but gives us a deep fulfillment
of life. It gives us so much more. And we have a crisis right now of loneliness and isolation as
we all work longer and longer hours to get more and more money to just buy more and more crap.
And we're lonelier than ever. And we're lonelier than ever. And you get, there's an epidemic of
anxiety and depression among the young generation that's consuming an average twice as much as we did
at their age. And they're less happy. So there's no empirical evidence that this pursuit of consumption
actually does make us better off. Aren't there, like if I was a 20 year old taking econ 101 or some
macro econ class in, in business school at the age of 24, don't in the first week, they just raise
their hands and say, wait a minute here. Um, I mean, what, what, I mean, you would think that decades of
demonstrable proof to the contrary would have shaken this up in the assumptions a little bit,
or is it just a, yes, this is a simplification, but it doesn't really matter. What, what's the story
there? So it's interesting. I'll have to send you the email. One of my former students, uh, was,
went on to do a master's in economics. And she told me in the first day of class, you know,
she was basically told all we care about is more that we only respond to self-interest and said that,
you know, if I didn't, if I didn't grade you, you wouldn't do your work. And the student was like,
no, I have an intrinsic motivation to learn this stuff. I'm not here for the grade. Um,
and the idea being that, you know, we're only care about these individualistic rewards is she,
she actually quit the program and sent me an email saying, you know, uh, referring to this exchange
and saying how ridiculous it was, how could they be telling her that all she cares about is her
self-interest when, you know, she's very interested in ecological economics. So they do challenge it,
but it continues to be taught. Okay. Um, when I invited you, I thought we'd talk about each of
these 10, 10 myths that I had in my, frankly, we actually could spend the entire hour plus talking
about just this one, but let's, let's move on. Um, and, uh, hopefully by the time this airs, you can share
some resources and papers for, for further, uh, um, digging for the, for the viewers. Okay. Second myth is,
is what is something worth value and price? Uh, and the economics teaches us that whatever the market
says the price is, that is its value. Can you, can you unpack the logic there and why that's
incorrect? And it goes beyond that because basically what it says is that there's the,
you know, there's this, uh, supply curve, which is supposed to measure the marginal cost of producing
things. And the demand curve is the marginal benefit and where they intersect. There's a price,
uh, that determines that the quantity of goods produced meets the demand and allocates the resources
to those who, who, uh, value them most. And this is, um, and then we take that value, that monetary value
to be, you know, the, the maximizing monetary value maximizes human welfare.
So price is the single feedback loop that drives this complex system to a welfare maximizing equilibrium.
But price, if, if I had, I think the example I did in my, frankly, is if there's a painting and
someone's willing to spend a hundred dollars on it, but I don't have any money and I'm only willing
to pay $7 for it. The market treats its value at a hundred dollars. And so it has much more to do
with the ability to pay than it's actually intrinsic worth. And so, you know, you, you said that this
is not taught in med, in, uh, um, MBA programs. Interestingly, in the 1940s, 48, Paul Samuelson's
kind of first textbook in modern economics said, you may be aware that, uh, JD Rockefeller gives his dog
milk every day while there are children in New York suffering from rickets. Is that a market failure?
Says, no, that's markets doing what they're meant to do, allocating resources to those who have the
most money. So he recognized back then that of course that is not welfare maximizing or any way
optimal. And a few economists do admit that the goal of markets is to maximize monetary value,
which means selling the loaf of bread to the overfed American, who's going to throw 40% into the garbage
instead of the destitute mother trying to keep her children from being malnourished.
And so in an unequal economy where some people have immense purchasing power, because as you pointed
out, you know, market demand is preferences weighted by purchasing power and purchasing power dominates.
So in an unequal economy, resources are allocated to those who really get the least value from them.
And not only the people, um, but the ecosystem functions and stability, right?
And I would argue that's a bit of a different issue in that, um, with ecosystems, you know,
if you chop down a tree, uh, and it goes to me, uh, it, the value is determined by the individual is
willing to pay the most for it. Cause when I use that tree to build my house, you can't use it. Only one
of us gets it. Value is determined by who pays the most. But when that tree is part of a forest and
sequestering carbon and stabilizing the climate and, you know, filtering water and regulating against
floods, those benefits, no matter how much I benefit from a stable climate to grow my garden
in Vermont, doesn't leave any less stability for you to grow yours in, uh, in Minnesota. So the value
of that is the sum of values across all individuals and markets can't figure that out. So what they do
is they put the private property right on the tree bought by me to build my house, degrades the,
you know, calls all these other costs that are just completely ignored. So we just simply ignore
the ecological benefits because they don't fit into the market model. They're not, they don't go to
individuals. This isn't a rip on not including negative externalities in the prices like, like
pollution or ocean acidification. This is not including the positive externalities in the
prices. Yeah. But even then, including things in prices, you know, we have this idea that, um,
you know, if we put the right price on every, uh, environmental asset and incorporated that price
into markets, the market would solve the problem. But if you think about it, you and I, you know,
we're fair compared to a complex ecological economy, we're simple little individuals. And yet the number
of feedback loops in our body to maintain homeostasis is uncountable. And then economists assume that a
single feedback of price is sufficient to bring the entire ecological economy into some welfare
maximizing equilibrium. That's just kind of fantastical thinking, totally out of sync with modern
science of complexity. I was going to ask you this later, but it's just too pressing in my mind and my
body to, to not ask at least repetitively and start here. Um, I just increasingly get this feeling
that the entire economics curriculum in the world and the business school curriculum that lies on top
of it was never intended to be based on the truth and the science. So this always getting back to your
first myth, which is that we always act in our own rational self-interest. Why would the economists
be interested in truth to begin with? If they were consistent with their model, they would be trying
to convince you to engage in behaviors that benefit them. Um, so there's not even any, you know, within
their own theory, there's no reason they should be trying to- So is it just they grabbed the reins of
the global economic system and never looked back? Well, so I mean, I think these things evolve. I think
economic systems continually evolve. A lot of these myths that are total myths now used to be more
true perhaps in the past, not the ones we've gone over so far, but as the system changes, you know,
are it's, it's like in any, you know, is the environment changes, the members of the species
in that environment have to adapt to the changes. So the, the problem here is, and we should save this
for the conclusion maybe, but every one of these myths is demonstrably intermediate to extremely false.
But the conversation we're having about eventually humans having a new reality-based economic system,
that's a separate question than what do we do now? Because we are the, the, the earth economic
superorganism ship just hit an iceberg and you can't just say, well, all these myths are
false. So deal with the truth because the truth would be a radically different system.
So I want to, I want to make sure our viewers understand where I am on this. There's the reality
and the truth, which I deeply care about. And then there's a separate question of what do we do today
in 2025 to get from here to a softer landing? That's a, that's a different discussion. So for
now, I just want to understand the actual myths and realities. Okay. Anything else you want to say on
value and price? I guess value and price would work better if we were in a highly equal economy.
So when like, uh, you know, um, uh, Paul Samuelson talks about Rockefeller versus the kid with Ricketts,
those somebody with immense wealth, somebody with very little, if we were all fairly equal,
uh, then resources probably would be allocated to those who value them the most. Um, but, uh,
you know, that would require, uh, an entirely different economy. Yeah. Okay. Uh, staying in
microeconomics, um, here's a myth that, um, I talked about that I learned from you, uh, that the economic
textbooks continue to teach that supply curves are upwardly sloping. Um, explain what that means
and the reality and why it's important. So first of all, a supply curve in economics is supposed to be
the marginal cost, the cost of producing an additional unit, um, by the producer. And what it
says is upward sloping supply curve means that each additional unit costs more to produce than the
previous unit. And, uh, and I started out my economics class by asking students how many think
when firms produce more, the price per unit goes up and how many think it goes down a hundred percent
of my students who have not had economics before say it goes down and actually virtually 100% of the
studies on this, where they actually empirically ask firms, what happens to your prices, your costs,
when you increase output, they always go down. And, uh, you know, I think, as you point out in your,
uh, frankly, uh, Alan Blinder, very famous economist did a study on this and interestingly
showed in his study, he only found that 89% of firms face downward sloping supply curves. I think
it's much higher than that. Um, but in his textbook, he still models upward sloping supply curves.
And why this is really important is the whole story of the market economy is there's huge numbers
of nearly identical firms competing with each other to sell you products at the lowest possible cost.
And the deal is if supply curves slope upwards, as firms get larger and larger, become less efficient
and they can't compete. So you want huge numbers of small firms. But on the other hand, if prices go
down, then it's empirically, technically more efficient to have very few producers of huge numbers.
And this is empirically the case in our economy. But if that's the case, you know, maybe you really
don't want to leave the control over vital industries like oil or food or, you know, media in the hands
of profit maximizing capitalists who would, um, who are really only in one or two or three firms by,
by the end of the day, because, because that's what the math ends up being. Yep. So the math ends up
being with downward sloping supply curves, what you would expect is an economy very much like ours,
where you have a huge, a few giant firms with comparative, you know, with, with advantages over
the smaller ones, nobody can compete. Somebody tries to compete with Amazon, they'll under price
you, they'll squeeze you out of the market. And so what you would end up with is a handful of firms
with huge amounts of economic power, and theoretically providing us with cheaper goods and services
because of that technical efficiency, unless they're profit maximizers, in which case they
can charge whatever they damn please. So what if suddenly in the world, in the world's business
schools and econ textbooks, the reality was, uh, taught correctly that the vast majority of firms face
downwards, uh, uh, marginal costs in the supply curve. What, what would be the implications of that?
So the first implication is that competitive markets are stupid because they're going to,
uh, they're just being way more expensive. If you have economies of scale, then you want a few firms
producing a lot instead of a few producing a little. So competition is stupid. And then that raises this
really big question. So if you're not going to have competition, do you want the private sector to
control production? Or do you want to regulate it? Or do you want to have, you know, workers controlling
the production? I mean, it raises huge questions and I, I really like in your, frankly, you stay
away from the ideological partisan issues, but it, this almost automatically raises those questions.
And however you might answer them, it would at least force people to ask them. And, and these are
big questions about who controls, you know, our economy. Are people asking them like this? I haven't,
other than you, I haven't heard about this, uh, supply curves are, are downward sloping and the
implications of that. Economists have always recognized this idea of natural monopolies
and a natural monopoly. So there's a big fixed cost to do something like build a reservoir and
build water mains. And they're really small marginal costs, hook up another house to the water
main. So it'd be insane to have like 10 reservoirs and 10 water mains. You could choose
which water is cheapest that day. So economists recognize these natural monopolies, but we live
in an information economy and information is the biggest natural monopoly. It takes an awful lot of
work to develop an idea and to develop a new operating system, to develop a new technology for
capturing solar energy. But once the idea is there, you can spread it virtually for free via the internet.
So we have had, you know, we're not people weaving in their living rooms, you know, in 18th century
England, we have capital that can be invested to expand our productive capacity and, um, and allow
these firms to get economies of scale and especially in an information economy. So, and the other big thing
that this might not even be so bad, except that, you know, economic power now translates into political
power. So we see these people whose sole criteria for kind of guiding our country is the fact they
were good at making money, which often meant they were lucky at honing in on a monopoly before others
could. Okay. Um, we're just warming up here, my friend. Those were microeconomic, uh, myths. Let's, uh,
let's move on to macro. This is something that I did my PhD thesis on and I, I know quite well, but
I've, I've, I've talked about it a lot on my podcast and my, frankly, so I'd kind of like to just let you
tell the story. Um, but the fact that energy is, um, treated as just like any other tradable,
substitutable, uh, input into our economic system and that capital and labor, uh, largely describe our
wealth and productivity. Um, what, what is the conventional view here? Uh, what is the reality and
why is it important? It's a law of physics. You can't do work without energy. Every single
economic product requires inputs of energy. Most of the energy is fossil fuels. When we burn it,
it generates waste. So the economics ignores energy input, ignores the waste output. Um,
but it's also, it goes way beyond that. So I thought your description on frankly was really solid,
but it's also the same with materials. And I Googled this just out of curiosity. I Googled
production function for a pizzeria and, uh, and shows it to make a pizza. You need ovens,
which is capital and cooks, which are labor. And to make more pizza, you need bigger cooks and bigger
ovens. And meaning that, you know, there's no energy inputs, no waste outputs and no raw ingredient
inputs. If you look harder, you can find production functions that include raw ingredients. So the,
the, you know, the, the dough and the cheese and the sauce, but in those, everything is substitutable.
So if you have enough ingredients to make 50 pizzas and a hundred people show up to your pizzeria,
no problem, hire more cooks and more labor. So because we have removed energy and natural resources
and waste absorption capacity from the equation, we don't care about those. There's no concern
about resource depletion or energy depletion. It's magical thinking, but put on the hat of a
conventional, uh, um, Orthodox economist, they, they truly believe and continue to teach that those two
variables, capital and labor, which is basically humans, um, combining money and, and technology and
innovation describe everything that that's sufficient to describe what's happened the last couple of
hundred years. Yeah. And the deal here, and you know, there is, um, there's ultimately it boils
down to a belief that as a resource becomes scarce, the price increases leading people to develop
substitutes or to consume less. And so the idea is there's no specific resource we need. We have,
you know, and we have this huge planet. And so one resource becomes scarce, we'll develop another.
Of course, there are no substitutes for energy. It's kind of like,
other than other energy, other, other energy. And the same with food. There's no substitutes for food
other than other food, but didn't someone's recently say, oh, we could get by without
food. Cause it's only 3% of our, our GDP or something like that. So the whole quote is Thomas
Schelling Nobel laureate in a article you can still find on greenhouse gas economics, who he says that,
climate change is not really a problem because it primarily affects agriculture,
which only accounts for 3% of our GDP. So if we lose 30% by 2050, we'll achieve our GDP goals in
2051 that we otherwise would have achieved in 2050, no harm done. Yeah. But that we lose a third of our
food in the process. And people starve and mess, but we could just go see more movies or dematerialization.
We'll just read recipe books. I mean, you know, if we want to dematerialize the economy,
I'll read the recipe instead of eating the meal. So in my, uh, frankly, I challenge any business
school or economics professor watching it when there would probably be very few to just spend
three minutes and Google how much energy is in a barrel of oil, how that compares to a human doing,
trying to generate that amount of power, uh, manually and look at the fact that we're paying
pennies for something that gives us tens of thousands of dollars worth of benefit.
If an economist, uh, uh, card carrying economist were to do that, how, how would they debunk,
uh, th this view or what, what would be a, uh, uh, a rebuttal to, to what I just said?
So their rebuttal would basically be that, um, so I want to point out one thing really quick first
that, uh, wealth of nations, Adam Smith's, you know, magnum opus on the, uh, we misinterpret
him very often, but it forms the basis of the modern economy that came out in 1776.
That was the same time the improvement on James Watt steam engine came out
and the steam engines were used to pump water out of coal mines.
And the basic point being that the modern market economy
and the fossil fuel economy began at the same time and have always been together.
And we attribute everything to the magic of the market where you and I would attribute it to the
magic of fossil fuels.
And so, but they would say though, if you look back then we were using steam engines to pump
water out of coal mines and, uh, Jevons, a famous economist at the time, he said that,
well, there's no substitutes for coal.
You know, we have this finite amount of coal.
There are no possible substitutes.
Therefore we have to look at how what's happening as we, you know, how it's being used up.
And famously, he just, he found that the more efficiently we learned to use coal,
the more we used.
But what the economist would say, since then we have discovered so many other sources of energy,
which is true.
We discovered natural gas, uh, and oil and uranium and all these other things that.
Yeah.
And, you know, and so their assumption is all of those are also finite, but keep going.
Right.
Right.
And as you know, though, that, um, uh, you know, there's the methane clathrates at the bottom of
the ocean, there's all these other possible sources that economists just say when the price
is right, when the other ones get scarce enough, we'll just develop those new technologies.
And for those technological optimists, I'd like to introduce them all to Thomas Midgley Jr.
I'm not sure if you know who Thomas Midgley Jr.
I don't.
So he, he invented tetraethyl lead so that we put in less, um, leaded gasoline, which, uh,
the estimate is that you and I, our IQs are about 7% lower than they would have been because
we grew up, we grew up huffing lead all the time as we walked down the streets.
Wow.
Um, Thomas Midgley Jr.
also did, got lead poisoning, did harm to himself.
He then went on to invent chlorofluorocarbons and which at the time were considered just the
safest stuff ever compared to the horrible ammonia that would blow up.
And, you know, it was, um, even James Gaia gave a presentation saying there's no possible
harm chlorofluorocarbons could do.
And it turns out we almost wiped out life on earth.
And had we developed bromofluorocarbons first, they're even worse.
Things would have been much worse.
And then Midgley went on to, um, due to damage to his health from the lead, uh, he was bedridden.
So they developed a device to get him out of bed in the morning that killed him.
So technological solutions do not always work.
They can have really negative.
So this is one guy who did two potentially, you know, existential threats to humans through
his technological advances.
And we forget about that.
And you don't know, um, you know, they say if he'd done bromofluorocarbons, by the time
we realized the harm they did, that they were much worse of chlorofluorocarbons to the,
uh, um, ozone layer, it'll have been too late.
Okay.
So I didn't know that, but let's just use that as a hypothetical example.
If there is a technology that is invented because it needs to be to, uh, shore up a
shortage of something that's important, based on our previous discussions on the
microeconomic myths, if the price is high enough and we're insatiable and, and all the other things,
we will invent such a thing.
For instance, some terrible, um, a geoengineering solution.
Once it's obvious that climate is warming and it does actually mitigate warming a little bit,
but does something else crazy, esoteric that destroys something else.
So, so the, the framework of economic theory just will go for that, right?
Because we don't price externalities or the true costs.
Yeah.
But when you bring up your other myths, as you've been talking about, you know,
we are pursuing ever increasing material consumption. And to do that, you would need
ever increasing energy use. Um, sadly, that's not actually making us any better off. So we're,
in my view, we're pursuing the wrong goal. It's like, uh, Yogi Berra once said, we might be lost,
but we're making great time. And, and that's what I see is pursuing consumption. We're lost as hell.
We're making good time less than it used to be.
Can you briefly describe the solo residual and the fact that capital and labor are supposed to
describe our wealth and productivity, but there was this little fudge factor called solo residual and
why after all this time, haven't people shown credibly that a large part of the solo residual
is maybe from the 500 billion, uh, army of fossil helpers that we have. What's going on there?
So the economists say the solo residual is a result of technological progress and knowledge.
And I actually, you know, I do believe that the human mind is collective.
I think as individuals, we're not very bright.
Well, certainly 7% less than, than I should have been.
But you and I, like, you know, if we studied our entire lives to try to make these glasses,
the way they're made today, to learn all the, you know, you need low metallurge. You need no
optics. You need to know, I mean, all the machinery to extract the resources, bring them here.
No single human in a lifetime could learn how to make our glasses or how to make our shirt.
So we have specialized just as cells in our body specialize. You have your eyes,
cell, your liver cell. We have specialized in the economy. Each human does a small part of this
big hole, but our collective knowledge is amazing. So economists would say, well, okay,
so we developed this energy, but that was just one example of us using our collective knowledge to
develop a new resource. And we will just develop more and more resources. And the fact is, and you
know, and I am actually a big believer that we are capable of, you know, doing major breakthroughs.
Also, as I'm sure you're aware, talk to any physicist, what happens if we keep increasing our
use of energy exponentially for the next thousand years? Well, the worst side effect would be the
surface of the planet would be hotter than the surface of the sun. So we'd all be dead.
But the other element of this is that as we've acquired more and more energy, we've used it to
disrupt more and more natural systems. And so even if climate change was not a thing, even if energy was
infinite and cheap, uh, as we keep using more, we are going to do, you know, destroy more biodiversity,
pollute more of our waters do, I mean, we're going to, you know, cause irreplaceable harm.
And it's all in pursuit of those dopamine hits that you need the energy to generate. Whereas if we're
looking for the social connectivity and interconnections that really make lives rich and rewarding,
it takes remarkably little energy. You know, we're way past the point where, uh, you know,
at this point, I think we're using more and more energy to isolate ourselves increasingly.
And actually I think it just makes us worse off. And then what about the fact that we treat this
energy bonanza, if we acknowledge it at all as some sort of interest without recognizing that we're
drawing down the vaults? I mean, it really is. It's the biophysical equivalent of Charles Ponzi or
Bernie Madoff. If you really think about it. Yes. I mean, I always just put it in the phrase,
I think you mentioned, might've mentioned that here, frankly, it's like you inherit a massive trust fund.
And as long as you live off the interest, you're okay. Your fund generates that much more. Um, but as
soon as you start to dive into the capital, then the amount that, uh, fund can generate goes down and
we're so for fossil fuels, as you dive into the capital, I mean, there is no interest actually. So,
you know, fossil fuels, we're just burning up what we have. Um, we're depleting it. It's like just
burning down your trust fund. But here's the thing is the people that are in charge, well,
humans have 80 year expected lifespans or less. And the humans that are in charge are, have shorter
time horizons like than that. So from the behavioral perspective of dopamine and everything else,
it's as if it was interest, even though we really know that we're drawing down the capital, the, the,
the principle, but if in a short term horizon, we can, those who treat it like interest will come out
ahead. Yeah. If you're 80 years old and you inherit a trust fund, don't worry about living off the
interest, you know, go for the, you know, deplete the capital. Yeah. Unfortunately, I think, I mean,
that, I think that's what's happening right now in the world. Yeah. And it gets back to this idea too,
that, you know, natural selection does the, the selfish individual outcompetes other individuals.
Uh, it's the group with the few selfish individuals that outcompetes other groups,
but there are natural selection favoring those selfish individuals. And, and it is our system does
favor those selfish individuals. Well, the, the cooperative, uh, uh, group of 36 humans,
somewhere in Urkutsk is going to be doing well in 20, 93. So the bad, bad joke, the last remaining.
Yeah. Let's, um, let's move on to money. So conventional economics and business schools
teach that banks are intermediaries, uh, between savers and those that want funds. So unpack what,
and I know this one we could speak for two hours on because you teach this a lot, but what is the
conventional story taught in business schools and economics classes and what is the reality and why
is it important? And there's actually kind of two things. One is where does money come from? One is
where does credit come from? Okay. And where money comes from, you know, we always tell this story that,
well, where does government gets money? The government has to tax us so that it can spend,
but where do we get the money that the government is taxing? I mean, you know, so it's a U S federal
reserve note. So clearly the money has to come from somewhere before it can be taxed. And the
correct way of looking at this is that governments actually spend the money into existence. You know,
they pay their workers, they buy the resources they need, giving money to the people and the people
know they have to pay that money and tax. So if they don't accept the government's money,
they're going to go to jail. So you're kind of coerced into accepting that money, but because
everybody else accepts it, it's, you know, it makes sense to accept. And that money, even though
it was created by the money, but the government it's backed by the productive capacity of everybody
who accepts it. The other big issue though, is where does, you know, credit come from and finance.
And so this, the idea is that when I went to the bank to take out my mortgage, to buy my house,
that I was borrowing money that somebody else had deposited. And the fact is this has been very,
very well studied now. And as you point out in your, frankly, it's now acknowledged by the
central bank of the U S and by the central bank of England.
But, but by the way, when you and I were talking about this 20 years ago, it wasn't,
this was viewed as kind of a fringe thing to say, but now it's understood. Keep going.
I should say it's, you say it's understood, but still I constantly have students who learn it in my
class. Then they bring this up in another class in economics. And the professor is saying, no,
no, no, no, that's just not true. And then I send them the articles from the central banks
and they have to acknowledge, oh, maybe it is. But the, the deal is that banks, so it says in
the constitution, that only Congress has the power to coin money. So banks aren't allowed to issue coins.
But when I went to that bank to borrow the money for my house, the bank just wrote a check on thin air
for that a hundred thousand dollars. And for them, what they did was the deposit of a hundred
thousand dollars on my account was a liability. My mortgage was an asset, their books balanced.
For me, my mortgage was a liability. The a hundred thousand on my account was an asset,
my books balanced. So books balanced just fine. The deal is though, that because that is how,
you know, well over 90% of the money in our economy is created.
It means that collectively households in the U S are paying 10% of their income is interest to banks,
which I think is, you know, the same as tithing to the church. And the banks are able to capture
an enormous amount of wealth. So in the recent decades, the share of GDP going to the financial
sector is quadrupled. And I think it was very wise of the, you know, the writers of the constitution to
say only Congress can coin money, but it's a pretty big loophole that, oh, they're not
coining anything. They're just issuing money. So this is not something I said in my frankly,
or that I've thought about 10% of the, what the disposable income in the United States goes to
interest on, on bank loans, 10% of household income. I looked this good. I'd read this somewhere
that I looked it up on, um, uh, it's the F one of the federal reserve banks. And they actually,
I think it's a little more than 10%, but the larger issue is that when your mortgage and, uh,
your, uh, asset were balanced, that is an incredibly narrow boundary, uh, accounting of
what happened in the world. Because as I like to say, the same amount of oil, lithium forests and
dolphins and orangutans existed than the few seconds earlier before you got that loan. And that money is
going to be spent on things that require energy materials and have an ecosystem impact.
And it's, it's even goes beyond what you say, because I just get this hundred thousand dollars,
let's say to invest in a business or something, I'm going to burn oil. I'm going to chop down
trees. I'm going to do whatever it's actually going to reduce the size of the inherited trust fund from
nature. So I'm using borrowing money from the future, essentially to, uh, that depletes the energy
and raw materials that that money lays a claim on. So when it's time in the, in the future,
there's less, um, because of all that borrowing and, uh, um, yeah. And, you know, and ultimately,
you know, we can, um, you know, we don't have to repay debt. Like after world war II, uh, the European
countries had massive debt. So what they did is they had huge inflation. They inflated the debt.
And this is interesting that, you know, households in the U S people always talk about government debt.
So government debt is the terrible thing. Um, government, that's tiny compared to household
debt, household, that's well over a hundred percent of GDP. And, uh, and then there's the
business sector debt, every single financial claim that exists in the world, whether it's
household debt, um, corporate debt, not financial debt, because that offsets government debt, money in
your checking account, anything money in your wallet, it, when it's spent, it's a claim on energy
and resources. And so we continue to increase because we're insatiable and there's no regulatory
limit on, on this. As long as your bank is in good standing, we keep creating more and more claims
on the same amount of biophysical reality. Now an economist might say, ah, but that biophysical reality
is in, it's not static because technology will allow us to access more of it. Can you unpack that
at all? Or, I mean, I mean, that you're, that is what they always say. And it is, you know,
I think it's interesting that, uh, it was, uh, Arthur C. Clarke who said that any sufficiently
advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic. So basically we're saying magic will happen.
And in some ways magic has happened. I mean, you know, the felt, the fact that you and I are talking
from thousands of miles apart, uh, you know, previous generations would have said that's magic.
Yeah. Um, but the idea that the technologies will appear at the rate we need them and will not have
negative side effects and we'll solve the problems. Um, you know, that's a long stretch. And if we're
going to rely on technology to solve our problems, um, most of our problems these days are like,
you know, uh, social misery, ecological problems, uh, they're often public goods. So markets will not
allocate any resources to technologies that provide public goods you can't profit from.
They won't allocate resources to technologies that help the poor because there's no profit in
helping the poor. And if you use markets and knowledge, knowledge improves through use,
but then we try to do it through the market. So we put a price on knowledge. I get a patent
for a clean, safe alternative to fossil fuels. I'll charge the highest price the market will bear.
And first of all, other firms can't improve on my technology because I have a patent,
so I can prevent you from doing that. And second of all, the value of my technology is much less
if you have to pay me to use it than it would be if it was free. And so if you are going to rely
on technology to solve all your problems, you know, you want an economic system that develops
the right knowledge at the lowest price and then maximizes its value once it exists. And markets do
none of that. You know, it's actually, I work at a land grant university that was designed,
pay professors to develop knowledge that's freely available to all. In fact, pay other professors,
extensionists to go and give that knowledge to people. That's a far more efficient model.
Let's move on to debt. So if money is a claim on energy and materials, debt, which we keep
increasing globally, is a claim on future energy and materials. But the way that business schools
teach it is if I have a business that I own and is fully paid for, and I generate some GDP,
the contribution to this society is the same as if someone borrows all the money to build that business
and has that contribution to GDP. So debt in the way that I learned it, it's an intertemporal
transfer of consumption preferences, and it's totally agnostic on the impact on the whole system.
Please unpack that and explain.
Yeah. So again, you know, and this gets back to what we were talking about with the way money is created.
So it has huge impacts, first of all, on the distribution of wealth, because we've given
some individuals, some, you know, institutions the right to create money out of thin air
and then extract payments from us for doing that. And we have these, you know, and if you think about
it throughout most of US history, we've always had these bubbles and busts with debt. So we'd build up
more debt than there was resources to back that. So what would happen is the debt would collapse.
So this happened throughout history, but you know, in 1929, the outstanding debt in the US just
plunged. And so this was a kind of a normal thing. When you develop too much debt, you'd have a huge
financial crisis and the value of the debt would disappear. And then you would no longer have those
unmeetable claims on the future. What we've done now though, and this is an analogy to forests,
all of you are probably aware right now, the weather quality here, the air quality here is bad because
of Canada is burning out where you are. Maybe it's because California or British Columbia are burning.
But what happened is in a forest, you would have this buildup of a dead material and would,
they would get to a certain point and then it would ignite, burn down a patch. And then that could re,
but without destroying the whole forest. And then you could get seeds and everything and animals from
the forest to repopulate that patch. And I think this is analogous to what we're doing with our
our financial system. Now, every time now we're threatened with a financial crisis,
rather than putting out the, you know, forest fire, we lower interest rates,
which prevent, which essentially makes it easier to pay off the debt and to accumulate more debt.
So I look at this as akin to continually suppressing the fires. Now we have this just more and more and
more debt that used to just burn out without destroying the whole economy. Now we've gotten
to the point where when that fire catches, it burns down the whole forest system or when that
debt is unpayable, it collapses the whole financial system instead of just a few banks.
Yeah. The, the, the, as you know, this is my view and this is the, the fundamental logic underpinning
what I call the great simplification. I mean, take Japan, they had zero interest rates for the longest
time and now they're up to two and a half, 3%. They don't have any energy to speak of and the central
banks themselves, uh, the, the bank, the BOJ owns and is buying over half of their government bonds,
which is the thing that they issued, uh, to, you know, maintain their levels of consumption.
There's no way out in, in, in what we face monetarily. Either we have three choices,
both Japan, the United States and, and everywhere else. We, uh, raise taxes. So that means we,
people have less because they have to pay more to the government or we reduce benefits, um,
which is going to be really bad for the poor because, uh, it's a regressive thing that we,
we have to cut our consumption or we print more money and temporarily, uh, kick the can a little
further. But at some point in 2009, we had a too big to fail situation and the, you know, central
banks around the world got together and they let, um, Lehman go and they bailed out Bear Stearns.
At some point, I think in the next decade, we're going to have a too big to, to save situation.
The bank of England and the fed won't be able to bail out the bank of Japan or France or something
because the amount of monetary claims on reality that we've built from prior crises is gargantuan.
And yeah, I mean, I don't want to get too depressing on this, but I do think that's the
end game here for the current system of financial digital claims on biophysical reality.
And yeah, and I, you know, and I think the solution there right now, we rely on the private sector,
private banking sector. I actually think the value of money is backed by our productive capacity.
You know, all money out there would have no value if we weren't producing things that could buy it.
So it's a collectively created benefit and we have allowed the private sector to capture the lion's
rewards. I'm a big advocate of having a public financial sector. It could be public banks. Um,
and this means that then when the private banking sector collapses right now, there's nothing else
we could do. It collapsed our whole economy. So we've got to bail them out. But if we had a
public alternative, then we could, um, have a, and it's not gonna be a smooth transition,
but perhaps a less painful transition.
I'm really interested in that. Maybe, um, you can come back and, and talk about that. Maybe we
have a round table with Ellen Brown or, or someone else because there, this episode, I want to
understand the truth, like, you know, just objective, no values, like what, what is really
going on when we're teaching economics. But once we understand this, the question becomes what the hell
do we do and how do we, uh, land the plane in, in that direction? So, so let's, let's move on, um, to
GDP as the goal of our societies, uh, economic textbooks treat that more GDP is good. And if GDP
is flat or declining, that is bad. Um, give us the, the business school, um, uh, educational component
and the reality and why it's important. Depending how deep you want to go on this. I mean, um,
Simon Kuznets developed the idea of GDP back in the thirties. He warned against using it as a
measure of economic welfare. So it's a measure of economic activity, not welfare. Um, and yet in
1960, the OECD basically said, let's all pursue, you know, GDP is our measure of welfare. And we've
been doing that since. And economists acknowledge that it doesn't really measure welfare, but it's a
great proxy for it. So they, you know, they recognize the flaws in the measurement, but
say, it's a really good proxy. Let's stick with it. And the one thing I want to point out too,
is that a GDP, you know, if, uh, the GDP tells us nothing about the wellbeing of the average person.
And I've probably, you probably know this and I might've said it on your show in the past,
but as I say to my students, you know, let's take the average height in this classroom, say a hundred
people and we'll be like five, nine, five, eight, add the tallest person in the world, almost no budget
average height. Now let's take the average income and add the richest person in the world. None of you
matter. So when you're looking at total quantity, uh, of GDP average means nothing. So talking about,
you know, we report on GDP as though per capita GDP is somehow a good thing, but you know, for the past
many years, two thirds of growth in GDP goes to the top 1%. So it's six or nine months since I've
said this stat, but I believe that the average GDP per capita in the United States is around 71,000,
but the median, which is the midpoint of 50% or above and 50% are below is like 54,000 or something
like that. So it shows the skew, uh, which is what you're trying to evidence. And what that means is
that the big number tells us nothing about averages. So why do we talk about it? And then of course,
you know, as you point out, um, you know, when we had, uh, when Russia invaded Ukraine,
they are the breadbasket of Europe. Uh, so disrupted the wheat production and wheat prices skyrocketed
and oil prices skyrocketed. And the idea is that when something is essential, I need it no matter
what my demand is physiological, not related to price. So I'm going to buy it, whatever the price is,
if I can afford it. And this means that small decreases in the supply of anything essential lead
to huge increases in price. So that the less we produce, the more it contributes to GDP,
which is absolutely idiotic. Um, and this idea that, you know, maximizing monetary value is the goal.
I would actually argue that GDP is, um, it's explicitly a measure of how much we pay for things.
You know, you add up how much we pay for the things we bought that's GDP. So it's explicitly
a measure of cost. And if you think about the problems with GDP, as we, you know, as we pump
out our oil, that adds to GDP, even though it's depleting our wealth. If we think about as a cost,
that makes sense. As we improve our technologies and the price of really important things like
computers falls, that would, you know, each computer could use to less to GDP. But if you
think of it as a cost, that makes sense. And I look at our healthcare system, you know, we have,
the United States spends like 50% more per capita than any other country in the world.
23% of our GDP is healthcare.
It's 23 now. Yeah, it's crazy. And, uh, and yet we have worse healthcare outcomes than almost any
other country. If I was to tell you that our goal should be maximize expenditures on, um, healthcare,
you'd say that's insane. Anybody that belongs in the denominator, that's something we want to minimize.
Yeah. So it does kind of make sense that we use GDP as a metric for cost, but then we have a, a
secondary indicator that is the benefit and that we have some formula or rules or policies that integrate
the, the cost and the benefit into some, uh, more sustainable, more sane, uh, pathway.
Yeah. And that's efficiency. You want to get the most benefit, the least cost,
you want an efficient healthcare system, the number of health adjusted life years divided by
the 23% of our GDP we spend on it. And instead we're trying to maximize that 23%.
Yeah. It's, it's crazy. I know all this stuff and just talking to you again, just re refreshes
how crazy it is. Um, okay. Moving on to the next myth. Um, this is the one that got me and why I left
wall street to come and study with you. Uh, because I read a book by our late, uh, uh, and dearly missed
friend Herman Daly that wall, that MBA schools and economists still today teach that the environment
is a subset of the economy. The economy is the main thing. So what is it exactly that they teach
and why is it wrong? And so, first of all, it's not just that it's a subset. It's just a pretty
insignificant subset. Um, so like, you know, as I mentioned, Parthida scooped a very famous
economist, wrote a article in 2008 about economics of nature or something. And it was just anecdotal,
but he said when he asked his leading economist friends, how much nature contributes to human
welfare and GDP said, ah, maybe 2%. So it's an insignificant subset. And, uh, of course, you know,
I mean, as you all know, there is, you know, um, law of physics can't make something from nothing.
Everything we make requires raw materials from nature. Those raw materials are otherwise the
structural building blocks of our ecosystems. When we convert them into economic products,
we degrade these life support functions of our ecosystems. And, uh, and of course you can't
create nothing from something. So all the energy, all the fossil fuels we burn all generates waste
that goes back into the ecosystem. And if you acknowledge that, then you would have to acknowledge
that the goal of, you know, exponential growth of the economy, which is, you have pointed out,
always requires energy, always requires raw materials. That is an impossible goal. Um,
and, uh, and instead of, you know, economists say, well, let's get the prices right. We can internalize
nature into the economy. We should be trying to internalize our economy into our finite planet.
And it's a totally different set of, uh, you know, institutions and approaches.
I'm going to ask a depressing question right now, because you and I for sure had this same conversation
20 years ago, have things changed in the halls of power in the business schools and economics programs
on this point?
So one thing that people have, uh, become aware of, and this gets back to the point I should have
made earlier when we talked about the upward sloping supply curve is, um, there are, they're now
acknowledging there are real costs to, um, uh, you know, ecological cost, climate change and
biodiversity loss. More and more economists are acknowledging that, but, you know, we talked before
about, uh, firms face a downward sloping supply curve, but society clearly faces a steeply upward
sloping supply curve. As our economy expands, we are burning more oil, destabilizing our climate,
wiping out more species. And at some point, and this is one of the ideas that is starting to catch on
at some point, the ecological costs of additional economic growth come to overwhelm
the economic benefits and growth becomes uneconomic. And if you look up uneconomic growth,
which is a term developed by Herman Daly, you will now find first thing shows up investopedia.
I mean, they talk about it at Davos now. So this is an awareness and the irony is that this is such
fundamental microeconomics as, um, the more you do have something, you know, um, the less benefit you
get and the more it costs, stop doing it when the costs exceed the benefits.
And yet we refuse to apply that to the economy as a whole. But when we developed, you know,
when Adam Smith and these guys were developing this, we were, our populations were so small.
Our resource use was so small. It was made perfect sense to ignore the fact that we were, uh,
part of a larger system. You know, it's like right now, it's perfectly fine to ignore that, um,
the universe may be finite. We don't know if it is, but we can ignore that. That doesn't matter.
So let's move on to Adam Smith. Uh, and in the next myth that I had in the, frankly, is that the,
um, business schools still teach, uh, and believe that the invisible hand, uh, where everyone acting
in their self-interest ensures positive outcomes for, for the whole system, uh, and collective
welfare increases. Is that still taught? And, and why is that wrong? So it's absolutely still taught.
And it, you know, it's, it's, uh, um, the idea is if, uh, uh, uh, resource becomes scarce,
price goes up that attracts more resources into production. And, um, and when the price goes up,
people demand less. So this, you know, the price mechanism will reallocate resources throughout our
economy to produce what, uh, the allocate resource to the producers who value it most is measured by
willingness to pay than to allocate output to the consumers who value most as measured by, um,
you know, what they, uh, what they're willing to pay. And, um, so this, you know, this, uh,
we have this invisible hand that just makes everybody better off, but the economists will
acknowledge that there are certain things like social dilemmas or prisoners dilemmas or tragedies
of the commons where this doesn't hold true. And it's very widely recognized across
essentially all the disciplines that a social dilemma occurs when, uh,
the individual is better off acting in their own self-interest regardless of what others do.
But when everybody acts in their own self-interest, it undermines society.
And under those circumstances, those circumstances, AKA reality, AKA reality,
all the challenges we face now. And I would argue all the big, you know,
obviously climate change, biodiversity loss, even alternative energy. Um, because, you know, we're,
the fossil fuels are, you know, they're, I can own it privately. Uh, my use leaves less for others,
but alternative energy, no matter how much solar energy I use in my house, doesn't leave any less
for you. We're not competing for it. You know, so cooperation works better than competition, but the
invisible hand idea, uh, is for a small set, a subset of resources, but it ignored, and it was okay to
think that way when the fossil fuels we were burning were too insignificant to affect the climate.
But now the, you know, the social dilemmas overwhelm the private benefits. So right now we have
is very often when I burn fossil fuels, all the benefits flow to me, the costs are shared. And if
you have the invisible hand telling me to maximize my self-interest, private benefits, shared costs,
that's suicidal. What if, um, someone is listening to this and they absolutely either don't understand
or don't care or don't value anything in the environment, does the invisible hand still, um,
be a false, uh, in, in what you just described? Does it still have a tragedy of the commons for,
uh, the collective human experience? I mean, I would look at it like, you know,
maybe in, uh, ancient Greece, they didn't know what oxygen was. Their ignorance of oxygen did not make
it less important. It was equally important. There's no species can survive without those life
support functions of our ecosystems, regulating atmospheric glass, grasses, creating the right
amount of oxygen, you know, regulating nutrient cycles, stable climate. So whether or not you
believe it exists, it's not gonna, you know. But my, my point is, is it's not just an environmental
tragedy of the commons. It's also a social one. Yeah, yeah, yeah. No. So there's, there's,
there's tons of examples. I mean, even the idea, and this wouldn't be considered a tragedy of the
commons, but Americans, you know, we throw about 40% of the food we buy into the garbage.
And we know that the smaller amount of food, the greater the prices dramatically. So us throwing
40% of food and price in the garbage dramatically increases prices. So poor people can't get the food
they need. That wouldn't be considered a, that's actually the market functioning like it's supposed to.
But the, this idea that, you know, that somehow the sink, again, this gets back to the idea,
the single feedback loop of price will drive this complex system to some kind of welfare
maximizing equilibrium shows zero understanding of complex systems. I'm going to ask a question
that I just thought of. I've never thought of it before. If, if economic theory was a human being,
could you label it as a sociopath? Well, one thing I do think is you could label
homo economicus as a sociopath. I mean, you know, is, is, um, you know, Kennedy says, uh,
ask not what your country can do for you. Ask what you can do for your country. Economics says,
you know, ask only what your country can do for you. Um, which is a crazy view. And that's a
sociopathic view in my, in my mind. It's like the cancerous cell asks only what, you know,
what your body can do for it. And the sociopathic human asks only what society can do for you.
Um, and, uh, so our economy is, um, yeah, whether, I mean, it's, it's modeled on a bunch of
sociopaths, which I think is really crazy. And I've probably mentioned this to you before. Um,
but I always ask my students and this comes from ideas from David Sloan Wilson and evolutionist,
you know, what are five characteristics of a good person and five characteristics of an evil
person and across cultures, across age groups, every different countries, everywhere I've done
this, a good person puts the group ahead of the individual, an evil person puts the individual
ahead of the group. And it's really weird that, um, you know, economists basically say we're evil,
but it's really weird that our definitions, you know, our self identify as evil. No, we are mostly,
you know, people are good and we have an economy modeled on evil people. Well, the, the,
the impact and the result of the economy could be construed as evil, but I do think humans are
naturally good, but now there's 8 billion of us and we're following incentives and behaviors and
prices and choices and hierarchies and power structures that the aggregate result is having
a deleterious impact on the future, uh, of our species and others as more people are becoming aware.
And, uh, you know, as I said, though, the good person puts the group ahead of the individual,
but how with other groups, we can do any kind of evil. We want the other group. You're not part of
my group, but that is part of our, uh, evolutionary heritage and that's oxytocin and everything. It's,
it's our in group. So who is, who is our in group right now? It's, it's the, largely it's the rich
that are alive today is the in group that's calling the shots.
But, you know, 5,000 years ago we were groups of like, you know, bands of 200 for the most part.
And now we're, you know, I identify, you know, a fellow American, somebody who lives over in
California of 360 million, you know, we have created cultural norms that allow us to cooperate
at larger and larger scales and larger and larger groups. And that's been human progress.
So moving on to what I had as my number one or my 10th myth, which is that all the things we're
discussing and others that economic laws are timeless and universal. Like these things are true
irrespective of when humans are looking at them or what scale or whatever. Um, what, what is taught
and what is the reality? Yeah. So it's really interesting that we always, I always, you know,
I look at science. So we observe nature, we develop hypotheses, how about how it works
after many observations, then if we test those hypotheses and can't refute them, they become
theories. And then if over generations, we can't refute a theory, it will become a law. So we talk
about the laws of thermodynamics, but the theory of evolution, you know, we really, um, you know,
we're in science, we're very sparing with the use of the word law. Whereas in economics, you know,
they'll take one little subset, you know, Sayers law that supply produces its own demand. There's,
you know, the law of demand, the law of supply, we dub thing laws, um, based on casual, not even
accurate, um, observations, you know, cause the cost of production goes down, not up. Um, and, uh,
and I, I compare this as an undergrad, I was a biologist and I actually believe that biology is the
same now, not the field, but the actual biological processes have not changed since the 1980s.
Yeah.
And yet when I studied biology, the central dogma of cell biology, consider the central dogma,
this is just, you gotta accept this is that one cell or one gene codes for one protein in a
unidirectional flow. We now know that's wrong on every account. One gene can code for multiple
proteins. Uh, genes can create proteins that go back and regulate the expression of genes.
So, so the science has advanced the site. And, and that's one example. There's thousands of examples
where in biology, we have changed our understanding of the system and economics. On the other hand,
the core theories have held been around since the 1870s. The system has changed. The theories haven't
in biology, uh, the, uh, the downward sloping supply curves, which you've shown are demonstrably,
uh, false or the, the, the, that they're upward sloping. That is a relic of the, the small shops
and the local production. It used to be the case, but 200 years ago, again, going back to complex
systems, complex systems, um, they have these critical parameters that if their value increases
or decreases too much, it shifts the system in a new state. And we are in our economy, ramping up the
value of so many critical parameters simultaneously, like, you know, international financial transactions,
debt, you know, all of these things. And, um, and, you know, so it's going to shift the system
into a new state and yet our theories, you know, we just, uh, we're so reluctant to change our theories
in any meaningful way. Okay. So those were the 10 myths still taught at business schools that I came up
with and, uh, we're already past an hour in here, but what, what have I forgotten my friend and PhD
advisor? I'm sure there's some others. I mean, yeah, yeah. So in the beginning when you said the,
the 10 myths, I was saying 10 of the myths is far more accurate. And some of those, you know,
we actually covered, um, but I think we got to start thinking very, very differently about our economy.
So for example, right now, you know, this myth that the only thing that gives us welfare and utility
is consumption. Um, and we were talking before about how, no, it's actually social connection,
um, that does this. And so in the mainstream model, the idea is that production is a cost.
Consumption is a benefit. And, uh, that's all we care about. Whereas in my view, production gives us
the chance to interact with others collectively to share problems that gives more satisfaction and
meaning and cooperation. So you're saying production in, in tandem with consumption,
not just consumption as the end all. Well, in a way, I think with 8 billion people on a finite planet,
um, I don't think consumption can be the variable right now. We look at consumption
as the variable. If we produce enough, we can consume more and more and more.
I kind of look at it. Well, gosh, you know, we're depleting the carrying capacity of our planet.
We should probably shoot for secure sufficiency, meet all our basic physical material needs. And
then for satisfaction, why don't we develop an economy where it's really fun to produce that
stuff? You know, we're going to be secure. We got what we need and let's just interact with each
other. So that would be, you know, that's kind of a wildly. So the basic idea is, um, here, I would
say that, uh, the economy is a continually evolving system and we've got to accept that. And we've got
to develop a new system that, you know, meets our current challenges. Um, that would be one of the,
um, one of the myths. Okay. And keep, keep going. Cause I, I, I have a building very large question
that I want to ask you, but I want to give you time to, uh, add any additional myths that you have.
I have many, many, but another one, many, many, really? Well, you know, economists to textbooks
tell us that markets determine who are the winners and losers, and we shouldn't let the government get
involved. And yet it's our tax laws, our subsidies, what not, what, um, you know, research the government
invest in our, our, you know, the fact that Trump is so wealthy is because real estate is the lowest
tax, it's the most favorable tax laws for any sector of the economy. You know, it's not Trump's
genius. It's Trump's that the tax laws, the fact that, you know, under, uh, Eisenhower,
the highest marginal tax bracket was 90%. And the distribution that, you know, the top 1%
had dramatically less of our total income that, you know, so distribution of wealth is not
determined by market forces. It's determined by the government, what business sectors succeed
or fail is determined by the government. And this idea that the government should be kept out
of it and let markets do that is nonsense. This is another huge flaw in economics that economists
assume everything is like a normal distribution. And they assume in any economics textbook, they
talk about all our production and consumption. Um, all our, uh, the mathematical formulas are smooth
and differentiable and, um, and Mandelbrough actually focused on fractal systems.
And, uh, and I don't know, I don't want to take too much time. Um, uh, in a calculus,
you have a curve, a smooth curve, and you want to estimate the value of that curve. You take a pair
of calipers and you measure the length of that curve. And as your calipers get closer and closer
together, you, the length increases asymptotically approaching its real length and increases by a
smaller and smaller amount. Uh, Mandelbrough looked at coastlines and he found that as we get more
accurate ways to measure them, essentially using smaller and smaller calipers, the distance increased
at an increasing rate. It's a radically different type of system. The length of the coastline from
Maine to Florida, if, if we use a tiny, tiny calipers is like enormously long, like longer than the
planet. And every time we shorten the calipers, the length grows by more. Wow. And these, so these are
fractal, fractal distributions. What does that have to do with economics? Well, so first of all,
they, we model everything as though it's smooth differentiable, which it's not. We're dealing with
all these chaotic fractal systems and fractal systems. Um, they lead to power law distributions
and, you know, smooth differentiable curves tend to lead to normal distribution. So we assume these
normal distributions with where the, the median or the average means something, whereas throughout
economics, it's actually power law distributions and these, and throughout nature, these kind of
chaotic fractal systems that we, um, you know, so take a look at, uh, um, uh, Nordhaus's climate change
model, which is dice, which is, you know, you know, the possible outcomes and the probabilities of each,
and therefore he assumes we know all possible outcomes in fractal systems. That would be a
nonsensical thing. The tiniest little difference in starting position and a fractal system leads to
totally different outcomes. And, um, and so, you know, and they, they learned that from weather
reports when they had a machine doing a weather report, they halted it, ran the parameters back in
and you got a totally different outcome because you couldn't run it out to millions of, um, significant
figures. It's funny because if I, if I think back 30 plus years ago, when I was getting my MBA at the
University of Chicago, there were a lots of Nobel prize winners there, uh, that were my teachers.
Um, and, uh, I didn't know any of the things that we're talking about then. I was just trying to get
a good job. Um, and it, but it all seemed off to me. It seemed like trivia and like a real, even then I
felt that it was narrow boundary. Um, I remember I wrote, uh, my honors thesis for Eugene Fama and
Ken French. It was called, uh, does the millionth monkey live in Las Vegas? And I looked at the
information in, uh, public sports betting markets. It just goes to show you how my worldview, um, has
widened substantially in, in the last 30 years. Partially I blame you for that, but so what other,
uh, what other myths are, are there that are still taught? Um, I, I'm sure you think about this all
the time, by the way, like, do you, are you still writing papers on all this stuff or in addition to
teaching? Yep. In fact, I'm writing more papers now. And so this year I'm on my sabbatical and I'm
going to dramatically revise the, um, ecological economics textbook. And, you know, for example,
we model economies as an equilibrium system and that's what the efficient market hypothesis does.
Efficient, um, or as equilibrium systems are based on negative feedback loops,
but we know that debt is based on exponential growth, which is a positive feedback loop. Our
economy is based on exponential growth. It's a positive feedback loop. So we model, especially
at the macroeconomic level, we claim it's an equilibrium system. When I would argue, it's a
wildly disequilibrium system, empirically obvious that we have bubbles and busts all the time.
And yet we call those corrections. They're not bubbles and busts. Um, uh, Hyman Minsky proposes the
financial instability hypothesis, which is kind of the exact counterpoint to Fama's efficient market
hypothesis. So I think that the idea that, um, you know, it's a, um, you know, an equilibrium system
is crazy. Another myth, if we're going there, you know, that we say supply curves are supposed to
slope, uh, you know, they show them sloping up demand curves don't always slope down either.
So the idea is use value. If you're buying something to use it, the each additional unit
has less value, but we live in a market economy. We buy things for exchange. So when the price of,
you don't buy stocks, you know, because they have a low price, you buy stocks because the price is
rising and that means, and that's not the price, it's the change in price.
But there are like Veblen goods, the higher the price, the more the demand is for that.
That's true too. And what, in, in a social species, what percentage of our
social species that marketing is one of our most deleterious inventions, what percentage of our
consumption is actually some sort of a status signal and a Veblen good? A huge amount. Interestingly,
like with my students, the Veblen good is how much of your food did you grow yourself? How many
times you repair your own clothes, how much, you know, how much that's giving them flex and status
right now? Oh yeah. Really? So among in the degrowth movement and these folks, but you know,
that's a very narrow population. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, um, just out of curiosity,
how many more myths could you come up with? Uh, if I was, um, giving you the time and bandwidth,
I mean, I could come up, I could come up with awful lot more. Um, you know, I knew I didn't have time to
think about it, but, uh, yeah, there's so much that is, and this is why I become a worse professor
because the more I learn, the more I struggle to cram it all in. And I can't, I was much better.
I think when I was more ignorant here, here on that one, professor Farley, let me ask you this then.
Um, I've just always been under the assumption because one of the core values I have in my life
is I care about the truth. And I just kind of assumed that the institutions, uh, especially
education is this evolving real time peer review process and the truth remains. And it's kind of
like a sharpening a samurai sword. We, we get rid of the, the stuff that's not true, but it seems like
in the single most important discipline of our world today, which is economics and finance,
it is not based on the truth at all. Uh, how do we explain this and, and where do we go from,
from here? So I think that's a great question. And that really gets at, uh, you know, my philosophy
of the social sciences in the natural sciences, we're looking for the truth. So I'm observing a system
to try to understand how it operates in the social sciences. I'm not observing our system,
try to understand how it operates. I'm trying to change it. And, and our theories in economics
do change the systems. So I mentioned earlier that simply taking a course in economics gets
people to think more like homo economicus, but nobody can deny that marks his theories about the
system he was studying, change the system he was studying. And that is true for Adam Smith, Marx,
Keynes, Friedman, hopefully Herman Daly. Um, you know, that our theories do, and this is the other
thing, you know, and this gets back to your thing where you're talking about the laws of economics.
No, we have theories that do change the system. And, uh, you know, when you tell everybody that
acting in your own individual self-interest is the best thing, then people do that. And it creates
a system better tailored to that. But if you create a system that's focused on social dilemmas
and the need for cooperation, which is what I think evolution did, um, then you get a different system.
So is this a distinction between normative and positive thinking that the natural sciences
are kind of what is, and the social sciences are what should be? My view on this, what normative is
values or norms or ethics, where did those come from? In my view, they evolve, they culturally evolved,
the bind us together into a collective capable of solving social dilemmas and the good, put the
good of the group ahead of the individual. We needed very powerful cultural norms to evolve to do that.
We created the system we have now. This is what humans do. But if you, so norms, and again, this is,
you know, so natural selection requires an inheritance mechanism, variation, and differential
survival. Genes are the inheritance mechanism that we always talk about. Variation is the alleles,
differential survival. We know that if you have, uh, you know, um, you know, some genes, you'll survive
better than others. But culture also is inherited. Where did you get your culture from? You know,
you inherited it from your parents and your community. And they cultures vary wildly. In fact,
there's more variation between cultures than between individuals in a culture and it huge impact on our
survival. Send some Wall Street executives to the, you know, Inuit territory and see how well they do,
or vice versa. Send some Inuit to Wall Street and see how well they do. So culture is every bit as much
of natural selection as genes. And I believe that our moral values evolved to lead us to allow us to
cooperate into a society. And when people distinguish, they say, oh, science is about, you know, what's,
you know, positive and ethics is about what's normative. I think those are creationists. You know,
I think if you're saying that ethics and normative values are outside the domain of science, you're
saying they didn't evolve. They didn't, they were somehow, you know, sent from on high. I'm not a
creationist. So I think that, um, that distinguishing between saying normative is not part of science
is, uh, you know, no more foundational than saying that genes aren't part of science. You know, we know,
we know the mechanisms by which cultures evolve and, um, and moral values evolve.
So let me, uh, let me close with a, a difficult question. Um,
you we've outlined a dozen plus myths that are being taught in business schools and economic, uh,
courses. Presumably we believe in culture's ability to change, uh, based on understanding the truth.
Um, and yet we live in a time where there's massive distrust in Congress and in government.
And so the question that bubbles up for me is if we're going to change in the direction of
truth, science, and the human potential, the human organism, the human animal living now and in the
future, who's going to lead that charge and how would that happen? And this actually relates to
another one of the big myths is that we say the profit motive is going to push all resources in
the right direction. Right now, most information that people are, you know, exposed to is driven by
social media, um, by, by the profit motive. So if you look at all our biggest firms, you know,
Google and, uh, you know, Facebook and Apple, you know, their goal is to get you to look at ads,
to get you to buy stuff. And we've developed, I think social media can communicate with
people around the world has tremendous power to shape our cultures. And we've decided we'll
turn it entirely over to the for-profit sector. It's not pursuing truth, it's pursuing profit.
And so why don't you ask me if I was still writing. So a paper I wrote last year was calling for a,
uh, transnational knowledge commons in which, uh, universities around the world would form a
consortium, all the knowledge they produce that's necessary for a socially just sustainability
transition is freely available to all. I also think they should be the ones deciding, you know,
putting together a social media where the, the algorithms are not designed to get you to,
you know, see more ads and buy more, you can actually develop algorithms that would be designed
to reduce teenage depression, to reduce our consumerism, to stimulate the cooperation and,
uh, you know, collective, um, human interaction and anti-consumerism required for the future.
But we've just decided that almost all the knowledge we get is going to be, um, determined by the
profit motive. And that's just bonkers. The epitaph, uh, homo sapiens, truth or profit? Question mark.
It's an open question. Uh, Josh, it's been so good to talk with you again. Um, you're not only my
PhD chair, but one of my, my best friends. I'm going to ask you this question because I know you will
enjoy it. Um, if you were to come back in the future on this show, which you probably will,
what is one thing that you're super passionate about that you would like to take a deep dive
on that's relevant to human futures? I mean, I guess what's been really exciting me most
is the fact that, you know, when I studied evolution, um, you know, we were taught about
competition. Everything is competition. Now we realize that it's really is about cooperation. You
know, that whole little spiel from the, um, you know, our cans to the multicellular animals. Um, and
I think that has really profound implications for our future. And it actually is what gives me hope
hope because we have managed to cooperate at larger and larger scales and address the challenges
we face. And I think that, you know, the profit motive, we have an economy right now that is
focused on the selfish individual when we need an economy that is focused on the relationship
between humans and the rest of nature, which in my view should be the same relationship as
between a cell and the body. You know, we should take the minimum we need for our survival
so that we can protect the whole without which we can't exist. And so if I was going to do one
thing, I like to elaborate on those ideas, um, which I think are, which aren't because largely
they're what give me hope that we actually have a ways out of our current dilemma, but not through
markets and profit motives. Let's do it. Um, thank you so much. Uh, hi to Mrs. Farley and your family
and, uh, to be continued my friend, enjoy your sabbatical and thank you for your important
work. Yeah. Great to see you, Nate. If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the great
simplification, please follow us on your favorite podcast platform. You can also visit the great
simplification.com for references and show notes from today's conversation. And to connect with fellow
listeners of this podcast, check out our discord channel. This show is hosted by me, Nate Higgins edited
by no troublemakers media and produced by Misty Stinnett, Leslie Batlutz, Brady Hyen, and Lizzie Sirianni.
