Given that we are biological creatures, why do we need meaning? Why do humans need to do all this
extra work in order to be satisfied with life? Well, I have to tell you that I've been going
through a, since the publication of the book, I've been going through a serious reflection on
this question again, and going deeper into it. There's many levels of answering that question.
At one level, meaning has to do with sense-making. It has to do with how we properly pay attention
to the right kind of information that can allow us to reliably solve a wide variety of problems
in a wide variety of domains. And that's one aspect of meaning, that sort of agentic aspect.
But consonant with that is we need to be connected to other people, because most of our problem
solving is done in connection with other people. So there's an initial sense-making dimension. This
is often talked about as sort of coherence in the meaning in life literature. Does your world
sort of, is your sense-making making sense to you, is how I sometimes put it. Like the sense-making
is what you're doing sort of automatically. And when you reflect on it, you go, yeah, that makes
sense. My world isn't absurd or things like that. And then we need to feel connected to other people,
because most of our problem solving is done via other people. That's our great superpower individually,
biologically, as you framed it. We're pretty pathetic animals. You know, a really angry dog can take us out.
And so our superpower is we can coordinate together and, you know, get some, train some of those dogs
and sharpen some of those sticks and then kill anything on the planet. And so we need to be
connected to other people. And that brings with it its own special problem that my friend Greg Enriquez
made sort of prevalent. We developed the superpower of connecting and coordinating called language.
And language is something really, really powerful in helping us coordinate, but it also does something
really novel. It makes the content of our minds accessible. We're sort of exposed to each other
in a way in which no other organism is exposed to its fellow creatures. And so we have to also develop
this way of balancing between coordinating with other people, but not being overexposed. So we have
to develop relationships of trust and forgiveness and belonging, and we have to balance between being
individuals and having an individual identity and a group identity. So that's all central to meaning.
And then beyond that, we fall prey in both of those domains to massive self-deception. I don't pay
attention to the right things. I misframe you. I'm biased in my attitude towards you. And so we have to do
a lot to correct that. We have to try and ameliorate that. And what that means is we also have to be
connected to standards by which we can correct ourselves, standards about what is most real,
what is best, what is most beautiful. And that's a deeper kind of connectedness. That's kind of a
connectedness to what we consider ultimacy. So I've tried to show you how all of these things are all
important dimensions in why we have to pursue meaning in life. I've become increasingly dissatisfied
with the standard psychological construct called meaning in life to measure and talk about all
those dimensions in a coordinated fashion. Can you talk to me about the sort of established
body of work when it comes to meaning and how you diverge from that or what you would suggest as an
improvement? Yeah. So the standard metrics are around sort of four dimensions, really three.
One is coherence, which I mentioned, which is, does your sense making make sense to you?
Another one is purpose. That's not well posed. Because if you think standardly of how people
think of purpose, purpose is you're working towards some ultimate goal. That's a very dangerous way of
framing meaning. Because if you never reach a goal, your life was meaningless. And if you reach it going
forward, you're pretty meaningless. And I discovered that way back in high school. And that sort of really
bothered me. So I think what they're talking about more is orientation. And then orientation is a more
important way. People have to feel not disoriented, but oriented in the world. And then the next one
they talk about is significance, that you have things in your life that aren't transitory, ephemeral,
shallow. But that seems to be just sort of one side of this, this deeper thing, which is called
mattering. You need to feel connected to something. People typically use the metaphor bigger than
yourself. I want to be connected to something larger than myself, right? They don't mean that
literally, because that would be ridiculous. Attaching you to a locomotive engine doesn't give
you a profound sense of meaning in life. So what's going on there is, I would argue something like
this. There's a deep connection between the sense of bigger and more real. And let me try and give you
an everyday example of this. When you're in a dream world, you're in this little world, and it seems so
real to you. And then you wake up. Notice we have all these waking up metaphors and enlightenment
metaphors. You wake up and from that larger world, you can see how the earlier world, the smaller world
is limited in biasing you and warping and thwarting you in you trying to get a flourishing life.
And I think that's what people are really struggling with when they're talking about
mattering, about being connected to something larger than themselves. And it's this sense of
realness, which I don't think is properly captured just by the psychological notion of mattering.
And here's the fundamental thing. I mentioned that meaning has to do with being connected to
something that's more real than yourself in some important ways, because it helps make you feel
more real to yourself. Now, that's a problematic notion to think of as just purely, I'm just
describing something like a standard psychological phenomenon. This is actually, if you'll allow me
one technical term, this is a normative term. Meaning is, a meaningful life is not, there's a script,
when I say your life is meaningful, I'm not just describing it, I'm praising it. I'm saying there's
something fundamentally good to it. It's meeting some standards of evaluation. But those standards of
evaluation are completely absent from the standard psychological model. That would be the crux. That's
one of my two main criticisms. And so, in a very deep sense, the standard meaning in life
psychological model is completely divorced from the cultivation of wisdom and virtue. And if you look
across all the religion and philosophical traditions, that's not the case. They're deeply wound to,
you know, wound together, bound together, right? So the cultivation of meaning and the cultivation of
virtue and the cultivation of wisdom are profoundly intertwined. Stoicism, in fact, said they're
exactly identical, which tells you how strong some positions have been on this. And the psychological
model is missing all that. The second one is, the psychological model, and this is ironic because
it's talking a lot about connectedness, but it doesn't talk about the connectedness. What I mean by
that is it only talks about the individual agents' attitudes. It doesn't talk about how the world is
showing up for them. So let me give you an example of how this can go wrong. You can ask somebody,
you know, and you ask them the standard sort of questions on meaning in life, and they have friends,
and they have family, and they have work projects, so their life is pretty meaningful, above average.
But you ask them, do you think your world's very coherent? Do you think the world makes a lot of sense?
Do you have a lot of trust in the world? Is the world presenting itself with a lot of beauty and depth to you?
And you'll get no. You'll get people saying exactly the opposite. And then if you ask people,
is your meaning in life actually bringing you a lot of peace? Is it really integrating you well as a
person? Is it reciprocally opening you to reality? Is it no? Because people are experiencing a lot of
burnout, a lot of bullshit, and a lot of betrayal. They're losing trust and faithfulness in their
institutions and in fellow people, right? And so there's a famine of people being able to get
into the flow state and able to have that basic trust and forgiveness with others, fellowship,
and a sense of faithfulness is massively diminishing. I just saw a report that Americans'
trust in the Supreme Court is at an all-time historical low. It has never been so low.
And of course, that is only prescient, I think, of what's happening all throughout the Western world.
And so the meaning in life construct is leaving out all of this that's really bedeviling people in a very,
very, very powerful way. And so I think the meaning in life construct gets a little bit about how our
agency works and contributes to meaning in life, but it's leaving out a lot. Let me put it in one
last sentence and then I'll stop. The issue isn't just about finding information relevant. It's about,
can you enter into resonance? This is what Rosa calls this relationship that is so centrally
lacking in most of our lives. Does your meaning in life allow you to reciprocally open? Does it
take you into the depths of the psyche and align them? Does it take you into the depths of reality
so you feel you're meeting standards that allow you to correct yourself according to what is true
and good and beautiful? Is it doing any of that? That's resonance. And then resonance also needs to
be transmuted into reverence. Are you ultimately oriented to what you consider ultimately most
real? Uh, because that's the, that's the, that's the, that's the judge behind everything else that
we're evaluating. So sorry, that was a long question, but I, not at all, not at all. Uh,
the realness point I think is very interesting. I, maybe it's a contemporary problem because of how
much people are mediated by the screens. Maybe this is worsened by the fact that we're atomized and
isolated into our little droid boxes and we spend a lot of our time on our own. Maybe it's because of a lack
of connection to nature and awe and dread or whatever it might be. But I would guess that
a lot of people have this sense that their life is surreal and not surreal in the, I can't believe
how amazing it is. I'm so blessed. Everything's going right. But in a, I don't necessarily feel
fully connected and grounded to the experiences that I have day to day. My mind and my feet don't
rest in the same location all that much. You could maybe call it presence. Um, but it's sort of,
it's more than just presence. Presence is necessary, but not sufficient. It's, it's the
connection to it. It's being able to feel like I can reach out and grab it. Like things are happening
and the things that are happening, uh, uh, they're important and I have some sort of agency and they
affect me and, and that they're actually going on as opposed to kind of like everything being a sitcom
and it all just sort of playing out in front of our eyes. So I want to, I want to really dig into
sort of things becoming really real and, and sort of where that comes from.
I think that's important. I think that is the thing that's, uh, uh, quintessentially missing from
the psychological construct. That's the sort of ultimate, uh, norm within the normative dimension.
Um, because you can undermine any of this, if like any of these relationships that are giving people
meaning in life can be immediately undermined if there's a sense of betrayal or that that was an
illusion or they were being deceived. Right. Explain. Can you think of an example of that?
So there's a standard one I use. Uh, um, so, and I've done this multiple, multiple times and it's
never failed to work. So it's not quite a scientific study, but it's pretty good. So I asked my students,
how many of you are in really deeply satisfying romantic relationships? Romantic relationships
are the culture's current surrogate, or at least one of its surrogate, idolatry sort of gets for God
and culture and virtue. Like you're supposed to find the one and they're supposed to do everything
and you're supposed to transcend yourself and find familiar, uh, uh, fulfillment in it, uh, which of
course leads to the weird thing that people value, uh, romantic relationships sort of most of all
right now, except maybe with their kids. Um, yet romantic relationships are the source of most
suffering and a lot of mental health disorders. Um, and so that tells you we're, we're, we're,
we're treating something. We're putting too much pressure on something. Okay. So let's take that.
We've got this thing. This is like our cultures tells you, this is where it is at. This is where you
find it. I asked them, okay, how many of you are in such a really satisfying romantic relationship?
And they put up their hands. They say, okay, now I'm only addressing the people who are in
relationships. So the rest of you, sorry, you're not in this now, but for those of you who put up
your hands, how many of you would want to know if your partner was cheating on you, if that meant
the absolute dissolution of the relationship and almost all of them, like somewhere between 95 and
a hundred percent reliably put up their hands. And I say, well, why what? Like you, like you could
continue to go on and enjoy the relationship and get all the pleasures out of it and all the
companionship and all the sexual gratification. Like what? Like why? And here's my students and
they're at the university. So they're hard bitten with cynicism and postmodern nihilism and everything
and all this sort of stuff. And they, without a beat say to me, well, because it wouldn't be real.
It wouldn't be real. And then that removes all of the other ways in which it is contributing to
meaning and life for them. That's the example of what I mean.
So good. So good. And intuitively, everybody knows that there is this sort of sense of honesty,
the honesta that you need to, that you expect. And, uh, you know, who was the experience machine?
Who did the experience machine?
Nozick, Robert Nozick.
Yeah. It's not too dissimilar, I guess, to the experience machine, but it's a much more
salient example that everybody knows. Um, yeah. Would you,
how, how would your experience change? You know, the Truman show might be another example of that,
where, you know, you're going around living a good life and everything seems fine,
but what if everybody else was an actor? Well, I wouldn't want that. Why? To you,
this sort of felt sense, nothing would have changed. It's the exact same. It's like, yeah,
yeah, no, but there's something about sort of intention. There's something deeper. There's
something beyond not just the sort of utilitarian, what do I get out of this situation? It's what,
what is the intention behind that? What's the meaning?
Robert Exactly. And notice his name, which is really central, true man. It's about truth. And
it's not about just conceptual truth. It's about like being true to, right? True to his humanity,
true to reality. And of course he's willing to break through the wall, right? Remember he's
sailing on the, on the little sea to break through the wall. Um, and, and, and, you know,
and that the same thing was offered in the matrix when Morpheus says, all I'm offering you is the
truth, right? Uh, like you, um, uh, and, and the villain, of course, cypher, which means a symbol
without any depth, right? He wants to go back to the matrix and, and, and we know that's why he's a
villainous person because he's betraying the commitment to reality and to his own humanity.
Just lingering on what you said before about the difference. I mean, a lot of people I think
will use purpose and meaning almost interchangeably, even though when, when you think about it, it's not
quite, but the two kind of come as a package pair. They're a twin pack of, uh, of values that a lot
of people talk about. When you were mentioning about how, if you use the word purpose, if you don't
achieve it, your life is worthless. And once you do achieve it, if you do achieve it, what do you do
next? It seems to me the difference between purpose and orientation is the same as between destination
and journey that one is moving you in a direction and it's kind of an endless game. It's an infinite
game. Uh, whereas the other by design, the purpose is this thing, unless you do some jiggery
pokery, pokery with your purpose and create some sort of like instrumental purpose. My purpose is
to show up every day in a manner that it's like, yeah, give me whatever. Don't litigate me. Don't
litigate me out of what most people mean by purpose. Um, yeah, it, it feels like that attachment,
attachment to outcome. Yeah. And I think when you, when you, as soon as you talk, I think that's exactly
right. Journey rather than destination, I think, and playing the infinite game rather than the finite
game, uh, Carson's notion. I think that's exactly what I'm trying to convey. What also comes up when
you, when you get back to the notion of orientation, uh, you, you, you start to connect, uh, what can be
isolated by the term purpose. You start to connect back to, well, what, like what ultimately orients you
is what is, what's true, what is good, what is beautiful. Um, whereas purpose can be very egocentric.
It can be what I most want to have. Um, whereas orientation is reality centric. What do I most
need to be in order to be in touch with reality, to be deeply in touch with myself, with other people,
with the world? Um, and see a lot of people have kind of, and you see this in sort of the rampant
rise in cynicism and nihilism and popular media because of massive senses of burnout and betrayal
and bullshit. Um, people have sort of given up on the world in some ways. Um, and the problem with
that is that's not optional. Our model of who and what we are is inevitably bound up with our model of
who and what the world is. And, um, so to the degree to which we find the world an incredibly
scary place is a degree to which we, we create sort of an insular, an insular model of ourselves. We
withdraw and we withdraw and we withdraw and we withdraw. Uh, the problem with that is, uh, that's
the behavior ultimately of an organism in pain, um, and in distress. And the fact that we don't recognize
it is that isn't the central of central importance we're withdrawing. Um, and that's the, that's the
move of pain and distress. That's the fundamental move of depression. So even if you don't feel
depressed, you're already behaving in a depressive, uh, manner. What do you make of the recent uptick in
depression and anxiety? Uh, how this sort of relates to the work you've been looking at?
Yeah. So, uh, Chris and I, Christopher, Master Pietro and I, we talk about, uh, three kinds of responses
to the meeting crisis. One is just a reactive, uh, sense of like despair. Uh, you see this in
depression, anxiety, uh, increasing rates of suicidality in places that are marked by affluence,
which is a very strange paradox, uh, given our current cultural way of thinking about things.
Um, loneliness, um, uh, addiction, all of these things are, uh, people basically falling into
some kind of drift towards despair in powerful ways. Uh, the number of close friends you have is
going down reliably decade by decade, even though the number of social connection to have up is going
up exponential, um, things like this. We're, we're, we're obviously we're doing it the wrong way.
We're doing more and more that's giving us less and less. Um, so that's one group. Then there's,
there's a replacement strategy where people try to replace the kinds of things that used to give this
normatively charged sense of orientation and meaning in life and give us ways of cultivating wisdom and
virtue therein in the religion and philosophy. People are trying to replace that with, you know,
with things like, you know, the Marvel cinematic universe, which they, which they investigate,
they identify with, they go to walk and dress up as these people or put, uh, markers of them in their
home and they protect this universe with a religious fervor. Uh, so there has been rage,
self-righteous rage at how Hollywood has destroyed these universes. I agree with the aesthetic
criticism, by the way, I think Hollywood has just destroyed a lot of these things, but people aren't
paying enough attention to why does this matter so much? Why do you spend hours online religion like
this? And that's a, that's a replacement strategy. And of course, people are also doing this can do this
in the political arena. Uh, they can do it with pseudo religious ideologies. They can do it with this
weird amalgamation of conspiracy theory and spirituality called conspirituality on both the
left and the right. Neither pole has any monopoly on foolishness. Um, so there's a lot of that. Um,
and then there's a replacement strategy, which is where you see hopeful responses, uh, to the meeting
crisis. You can see the rise of an ancient Roman philosophy, stoicism becoming super important.
You can see, um, uh, the psychedelic renaissance, the mindfulness revolution, the rise of biological
practices in communities around the world. All of these are showing that, um, there's also a healthy
response. What was interesting is how COVID was such a cleaving point, right? Because it showed that
how many people have what were like, what's called existential resilience. Soon as the normal routine
that keeps them busy, right? Busy unto death, uh, soon as that gets disrupted, they are confronted with,
some people were confronted with impetus of meaninglessness. Um, and they dove into, in
spirituality and all kinds of stuff. Other people, uh, turned to a replacement strategy and they started,
you know, attending online mindfulness courses, uh, starting to read some philosophy.
So it's, it's a very, it's a very complicated response, uh, to the meeting crisis.
I'm interested in the role of the individual on their own and, you know, even beyond the sort of
connectedness, interconnectedness thing, the fact that, uh, seeking meaning as a, a purely selfish
pursuit. And, um, I heard a quote the other day, which I loved, which was after a while,
you just get sick of yourself. And, uh, it really made me think, um, about that step change that a lot
of people go through from just living for me, just thinking about me to trying to serve a,
uh, pay it forward perhaps and pass it on. And that, that perhaps comes along for the ride as
a by-product of getting older, but yeah, I'm interested in the, the self versus, uh, um,
selfless element here.
Excellent. Um, and, and this goes towards another criticism I have of the standard meeting and life
construct. It's completely egocentric in its orientation. It should be asking questions like,
how much are you making meaning for other people? How much coherence and beauty are you bringing
into the world? And it doesn't ask those questions and that's exactly right. Uh, and you see the
self-centered orientation is extremely problematic. Uh, obviously there's ethical problems and we get,
you know, we get the increasing, uh, growth of spiritual bypassing as an, uh, as a growing
psychological problem. Uh, so people pursue spirituality, um, as a way of avoiding their
important economic and ethical responsibilities and obligations. And I think, and, you know,
and, and spiritual bypassing is an offshoot of this large, this growing group of people,
spiritual, but not religious. So if you look into the academic literature on spiritual, but not
religious, like people who do the anthropology and sociology of religion, what they'll tell you is
spiritual means the real spirituality means the religion of me. That's what it means. It's,
you're doing all the standard religious behavior, but you're doing it, uh, toward, for you and towards
you and by you and evaluated by you. And that's extremely problematic because, um, autodidactically,
we're really bad. Um, so have you noticed, for example, you're very good. And this shows up
metabolically in terms of even of, of cognitive effort. You're very good at pointing out the
biases in your friends and other people. You're really good at it. You are, by the way, you are
really good at it. The objective evidence shows you're really good at it. Um, and you do find it
relatively easy. And what that evidence also shows is you're really crap. And I'm really crap at doing
it for myself. I'm really bad at finding my own biases, my own self-deception. Now that doesn't,
let's be clear what I'm not saying, that doesn't remove the responsibility for addressing those
from me. Of course not, but that, I'm not saying that you're, we are still always individually
responsible for our vices. So I want that clearly stated, but what, what it shows is, and this is
something that, you know, that we've known since Socrates and, and we emphasize in until recently
in current scientific practice, you are my best source of self-correction and I am your best source.
This was supposed to be the engine of democracy, but we've lost that, uh, too. And so the degree to
which we become withdrawn and self-centered is the degree to which, um, we are going to, uh, fall prey to
self-deceptive behavior and the degree to which, uh, we might not pay, uh, pay proper attention to the
deep interconnections between our spirituality and our responsibilities.
How can people work out if they're being self-deceptive? By design, we're good at deceiving
ourselves. Yeah. Uh, but we're also really good at, uh, determining it in other people. That's the
counterbalance. Uh, so you have to, you have to practice a lot with other people. Um, and then you
have to imitate what it's like with other people, with yourself until you get good at doing it by
yourself. Um, and then there's a lot of things you can do to do that. So something that might not seem
obvious that actually relies on that mindfulness. Mindfulness practices like meditation are a good way at
becoming aware of how you are biased and how you're paying attention.
But how did you get that ability? Well, you got that ability by doing the following,
right? When you're a kid, you imitate how adults, because you trust them, they're credible to you.
You imitate how adults are taking a perspective on how you are taking perspectives in the world and
allowing them to correct you. And you imitate that and imitate that and imitate that until
you can take a perspective on your own perspective that is corrective. That's metacognition to use
the technical term. And that's what you're exercising in mindfulness. But that's, that's a
broad lesson to be learned. You practice dialogically with others until you can do it internally and
reflectively. It's the whole point of, uh, of, of Socratic philosophy. You hung around with somebody
like Socrates. And you did all of this Socratic, you know, question and answer and exploration with
him. And then eventually you got to the ability where you could do it by yourself. And Tisthenes,
who was considered the forefounder of Stoicism, when asked what he had learned from Socrates,
he said, well, I learned how to dialogue with myself. He didn't mean talk to himself because we do
that automatically all day long. He meant that he had so practiced it and imitated it so that he had
internalized it. So he had an inner Socrates that was quite competent at pointing out to him his own
bullshit and self-destructiveness. We sort of touched on it earlier on,
but I'm interested in how, how contemporary of a problem, a lack of meaning is. And you also said about
how as people become more affluent or as nations become more affluent, uh, problems of meaning seem
to increase. I mean, what, what, what use is there in us all trying to attain or chase after affluence
if all that comes along is a heavy side order of meaninglessness? That's a good question. Uh,
Rosa talks about the fact that we're in kind of what he calls dynamic stability. Um, I talk about it as a
frenetic frozenness. We have to put more and more effort in not to make things better, but to make
sure we don't fall behind or miss out. Um, of course, and this is what's predictive of the massive
amounts of burnout and Han talks about how, how we we've, we've become, we're not so much oppressed
and exploited by other people as we are exploiting ourselves and oppressed by ourselves.
It's the red queen fallacy, right?
Yeah, exactly. Exactly. Um, and, and so I think again, if you asked people and you use the standard
metrics, they'll tell you, well, I know I'm, I have connections. So I care a lot about my kids
and I care a lot about my friends and works important to me, you know? Uh, and so you'll get
that. But if you ask them like, and we know burnout is arising, the number of close friends you have is
going down. People's sense of trust in others and in institutions is massively declining. So again,
that's why I keep pressing on this. You have to ask this question really, really carefully.
Uh, and I think around those issues of burnout and being busy unto death, um, and, uh, you know,
sense of ever increasing bullshit and betrayal, I think that, uh, or, or if you want to put on the
other way, a famine, a famine of wisdom, scarcity, we don't know where to go. You know, we, we,
we find it very difficult to get into healthy flow situations. We have addictive and, and maladaptive
forms of flow, uh, generation, like video games. Um, we, we, we lack fellowship. Fellowship isn't
friendship. We've lost the whole category of getting together with people, uh, that we basically trust
because we all participate in something that we all are committed to together. Like what used to
happen in the church or the mosque or the temple or the synagogue, et cetera. We've lost, we've lost
all of those things. Uh, and again, we've lost faithfulness. We, we become increasingly short term.
And so it gets harder and harder for us, um, to be faithful, which means sticking in with things,
staying connected to things because of their realness, even though it's at times very unsatisfactory to do
so. Um, and so, you know, this shows up in the fact that people are finding it harder and harder
to maintain long-term relationships. You mentioned there about kids, and I'm going to guess that
most people would say a source of great meaning or one of the greatest sources of meaning in my life
has been kids. Have you guys considered the base rates reduction in the age of people becoming
parents and the number of people becoming parents that I, I've got it in my head. A friend, uh,
messages me semi-consistently when I do a Q and A's on the show. Uh, and he's very interested,
but he's a dad of two, uh, an old school sort of Irish guy. And, uh, he says so many of your audience
just need to have kids. Like they're asking questions and as am I about fulfilling my higher
purpose about, you know, enacting my logos forward about how, why, why can't I give myself a break?
Why is it that I never really seem to be connected to the achievements that I have in life, et cetera,
et cetera, et cetera. Uh, and I think, you know, what the sort of subtext of his point is lots of
those problems are fixed or pale into insignificance once you have children. Uh, I guess two questions
then first off meaning crisis and associated with, uh, declining levels of, um, people becoming
parents. And then the second one, is there something wrong or shallow or, or compensatory
about leaning on your children to provide you with meaning in life?
Yeah, this, first of all, excellent question, uh, Chris Eberstadt and how the West really loved,
uh, how the West really lost God talks about the fact that the countries that are the most, um,
secular in their orientation are all, are, are, is predicted by how much people are living atomically,
individually alone. Um, and whereas, uh, more religious communities, uh, uh, tend to be related
to people who live, uh, in more extended family kinds of, uh, situations. Uh, this goes towards
a lot of research that puts, I think, puts the nail, uh, in the coffin of the idea that people are
religious because they're stupid, um, and intuitive and not rational. Um, so, uh, some of the best research
done by Gervais and others who, by the way, are atheists shows that's not why people are atheist
or religious. That's not what predicts if people are atheist or religious. In fact, you get weird
anomalies. There's kind of a very weak correlation between how analytic people are and how irreligious
they are, but you get important anomalies. Like in the United Kingdom, uh, analytic thought is more
predictive of being religious than non-religious. And so the whole enlightenment mythology still espoused
by people like Dawkins, uh, and others, um, just doesn't, that's not what matters. What matters is
how many, remember the kid we were talking about earlier and how you get metacognition?
You have to trust, right? You have to trust, you have to entrust yourself to credible others,
people that you trust because you can't believe this, but you have to trust that they can see
things you can't see. And then what seems like senseless behavior to you actually has a deeper,
you know, meaning to it, a deeper function, right? And that requires, you know, typically, uh, you know,
we've relied on families to give us those kinds of entrusted relationships, but we've,
we've narrowed the family down to the nuclear family, the nomadic nuclear family. Um, and that has
seriously eradicated a lot of ways in which we could get meaning in life. I think he, your friend is
right, uh, in the sense that children are, are, are very powerful indicators, especially of how
meaning in life is not about wealth because you have a child and your wealth goes down, man.
The other one is it's not about a subjective wellbeing, uh, especially at the beginning,
having a child crushes all the measures of subjective wellbeing. You're not sleeping,
you're not eating. Um, you're wet all the time. You're under high stress because the baby's crying.
The person who you thought loved you the most in the world hates you right now, your partner.
Uh, uh, and, and yet, so that shows you the two things our culture tells us are necessary and
sufficient for meaning in life are neither necessary nor sufficient for meaning in life.
So I think having children is important. Children orient you non-egocentrically. You have to go from
how is everything relevant to me to how am I relevant to somebody other than myself? Um,
and I think that's a big, that's, those are important moves, uh, for meaning in life. Uh,
although as I, as I've been arguing, not captured by the current, uh, psychological measures.
Um, now I would say he's wrong and you're right about, uh, we can turn our children into idols too.
And we've done that. Uh, Jonathan, you know, hate has made a good career out of pointing out how
an idolatrous relationship to our children, uh, in which we made them the be all and end all of
existence and helicopter parenting and, uh, you know, and trying to wrap, uh, you know, protective
layers around them. So they never suffer hurt or pain has actually, you know, destroyed them
in some very important ways. And he's got a ton of research to show this. I know most people don't
like carrying that, uh, but, um, it, it seems to be the case. And so we have to be careful about
that. I think having children is a powerful way of reorienting you. I think our meaning in life,
the way I've been talking about it evolved out of our capacity to be parents. Uh, but it's not
enough to be a parent because if you're just a parent, and here's my point that I've already
made, you're still withdrawing into your own little circle and you can be having killed children, uh,
and not really caring about the world. Now what's interesting of course is children make you care
about the world, or at least they should make you care about the world. Um, and then that's my final
point, which is being able to care about things in the right way and really focus on what's the really
real. I mean, that's wisdom. Um, and your friend sounds like a good person. So for whatever set of
reasons, they probably were wise parents or at least wise enough. Um, that's not, that's not necessarily
the case. So you could get sort of intense feelings of meaningfulness, but you could be an incredibly
foolish parent. And I think that's very problematic.
Yeah. The, I had Dawkins on the show maybe four months ago, something like that. And we had a live
event. We had a discussion in, uh, in Austin, Texas where I hosted him and he was lovely. Uh,
but I got stuck. We both got stuck twice in two nights in a row, first live on stage in front of his,
his audience. And then again, the next day when we did the podcast and I mentioned how
derogating the story behind religion, whatever it is that people choose to follow because you can't
prove it or it can't be proven in the manner that you want it to be able to be proven doesn't reduce
its effectiveness. It doesn't make it any less useful. Even if the level of truthfulness, the bar
that you want it to reach is something that it can't do. And, uh, I've been obsessed over the last couple
of years with things that are literally true, but figuratively false and figuratively true,
but literally false. And, um, yeah, I, I kind of feel, I get a sense in the zeitgeist that
people are sort of turning away from the very hard, cold, sterile, uh, why it doesn't matter.
It has to be literally true at all costs. Uh, that, that doesn't seem to quite be the case. And I
wonder whether that is born out of a, we kind of had a crack at this. We tried to
simultaneous equation our way through coming up with answers to big questions and maybe I just
need something that works even if I can't describe to you why it works.
Okay. Well, that's a tall order, but, uh, I, I, I, I do want, I do feel I have a responsibility to
respond. Um, you have to be careful about, um, uh, this notion of truth. Um, it's very one dimensional,
uh, that's being used by Dawkins. Um, it's about, uh, evidence that convinces you that a proposition
should be believed. Um, I think that's important. I'm a scientist and that's what theories are built
out of scientific theories in the, in the scientific sense of theory, not in the everyday sense,
which is completely opposite to how scientists use the word theory. So I think that's important.
And Dawkins is a scientist. So of course he values that, but of course, that's not the,
those are not the primary ways we feel in contact with reality. Um, um, so evidence isn't the same
thing as relevance. Um, so your skills are, they have to be true to things. Like your aim has to be
true. There's a different sense of truth. You have to be able to make things present to yourself and you
have to be able to like interact with the world in a way that reliably, uh, gives you some degree of
agency in the world. That's really important to you. In fact, I would put it to you that if you had
to choose between your skills and your beliefs, you'd give up your beliefs rather than your skills.
Um, and they're a big part of how you sense what's real. This is know-how and this goes into your
procedural memory. But you talked about it a bit earlier and this is important. Um, we also have
like what it's, what I call perspectival knowing. What it's, what it's like to be you here now in this
situation, in this state of mind. And that is a different set. This is knowing by noticing. It's
knowing by being present. Um, it's how you're sizing things up. What's your take on things,
how you're framing things, all that sort of stuff. Now notice, uh, so my partner, she, she was gone
recently because she was at a yoga retreat, getting her certification to be a yoga instructor. We're going
to run retreats when we're both retired. And so, um, now I still had all my beliefs about Sara. I
still believe that they're all true. Right. And I still have all my skills for interacting with her
in place and everything, but she wasn't present to me. And she, that's, oh, and we, there's a sense of
that lack of presence really matters to us. And there's a sense, and you can just feel it right now.
There's a sense of this is real because it's present. It's present. There's this power of
presence that matters to us. That's not captured by propositions. I could state all of the propositions
all day long about Sara that didn't make her present to me. I wonder whether that's why long
distance relationships are often difficult. Exactly. That's exactly right. And then beneath it is this,
this is what I've called participatory knowing. This is knowing by sort of emplacement, being in place,
like you have a, like you have, you belong. It's not just a space. It's a place you belong,
you fit the space and the space fits you. So it's a place for you. Right. And, and, and this is often
very unconscious, but you, you lack it for example, when you're homesick or, or you lack a certain
version of it when you're lonely. And this really contributes to your sense of real. Have you ever
gone that thing where you've traveled to another country and it's all exciting and interesting,
but you don't really feel like you're properly in place. You're getting a bit of culture shock. And
then it starts to feel less real to you. It starts to feel surreal to you, to use your, and see, so
what Dawkins is, is forgetting, he's forgetting all of those other aspects of realness that matter.
If what we're want is to be in contact with reality. And secondly, right. It's not that he's
forgetting all of those. He's forgetting that our access to those non-propositional kinds of knowing
is largely done through what's called the imaginal. Okay. So for example, I'm present to you, I hope.
Okay. Do you, can you literally see into my mind? No, you're imagining it. Now it's not imagining the
way you're imagining a sailboat where imagination is taking you away or distracting you from reality.
You're looking through your imagination because you're trying to have insight, look into my mind.
Now let's make it even more freaky. That space inside your head where you're aware of yourself,
is that a literal space? Nope. Is it just a fable? Is it just false? No, because you get
real self-knowledge. In fact, that's central to you being a rational being. So that's imaginal. It's fictive.
Or Richard Dawkins, open a science book. Oh, look, here's on page three. Here's the solar system
model of the atom. That's almost completely false. Yet we teach it to kids. Why do we give them this
image? Because the image trains their perspective taking, gives them skills so that they can get to
the place where they can then get the deeper propositional knowledge. The imaginal is irremovable
from the way in which we need to train the non-propositional in order for us to get those
proper connectedness to reality that allows us to find the causal patterns that establish the
propositional, the scientific kinds of claims. What about people that think meaning is a thinking
problem? A lot of us spend a lot of time in our heads. We're learning. This is somewhere between
philosophy, psychology, sociology, all of these things. I think the only place I have to experience
these things is in the head, a little bit in the body, and that gets fed up through my head as well.
Can we fix this by just thinking our way out of the problem?
No. I mean, especially if we think of thinking as just running a lot of propositions together and
making sure they're coherent and computing with them, that's not going to work. As I said,
most of what we're talking about here when we're talking about this kind of connectedness,
this sense of belonging, this sense of emplacement is happening, right? It's happening
in a completely embodied fashion. It's happening non-propositionally, like your skills. You have the
skill of swimming. Can you get access to that skill without swimming or doing something imaginal?
No, you can't, right? What about what your state of consciousness is like? You have a kind of memory
for that, episodic memory. Like, did you take a shower this morning? And you sort of remember,
and you sort of relive it for a moment, right? That's different from your knowledge of our cats
mammals. You don't relive that, right? There's whole aspects of you that you can't get access to
unless you're doing it imaginally. And that means embodied. Like, this is all dependent on the fact
that you're embodied. The view that this is just sort of a matter of not having the right propositions.
Look, look, here's how it's fine. Well, here, let me give you a concrete example. This is from Thomas
Nagel. All of the arguments for reality being absurd aren't actually good arguments. This
came out and, you know, really, I think the movie is really good, by the way, everything everywhere
all at once. But all the arguments in there are, well, everything everywhere all at once,
that makes your life meaningless. Well, how? Well, because there's so much that makes this
insignificant. But if it makes each part insignificant, how can the whole have significance?
That doesn't make any sense. Do you understand? If all these little individual parts are made
insignificant by this huge collection of all the parts, how does the huge have a better standard by
which it renders all the parts so meaningless? Like, well, I'm so small. If I blew you up to a
galaxy, would that make your life more meaningful? Well, you know, what I'm doing now won't matter a
million years from now. So that means what's happening a million years from now shouldn't
matter to you now. Like, none of these arguments actually work. They're really bad arguments.
They self-destruct. That's not what drives absurdity. What drives absurdity is, right,
when there's a clash between your perspectives. When you have this, Thomas Nagel tells this wonderful
story, and he wrote this way back when, when we used to, the dark, barbaric days where we had
answering machines that were actual machines that were actually in your home and things like that,
because we couldn't carry our telephones around with us. And he tells this thing about, you know,
Tom, who realizes he loves Susan. And he calls Susan up and he hears the receiver get picked up.
He says, Susan, don't talk. I have to tell you, I love you. I love you. I love you. And then he hears,
Susan is not here right now, right? And notice you laugh. And laughter, like humor is that there's
a contrast between the two perspectives. There's the personal perspective of his life and the
impersonal perspective of the machine. And there's a clash there. Humor is when you're, when you're on
the cusp of authority. And I got to meet John Cleese, by the way, when, sorry, when you're on the cusp of
absurdity and Monty Python was brilliant at that, right? They could take you to the edge of absurdity.
And then what you do is you have a weird insight that relieves the absurdity. But if I, if you can't
relieve the clash between perspectives with an insight, cause that's what insight does. It relieves a
clash between perspectives. Then you will experience absurdity. Now I asked you, Chris, can you think your
way into an insight? Huh? I dunno.
Well, if you, have you ever needed an insight? Yeah.
And realized it just wasn't coming? Yes. Many times.
Insight doesn't work that way. Insight doesn't work propositionally. You can't infer your way into an
insight. In fact, it looks like the, the parts that are responsible for insight and the parts that are
responsible for inference are kind of like an opponent processing with each other.
Let me tell you why I say that. When we're doing bad inference, it's because we're jumping to a
conclusion. That's insight. Insight is when you jump to something. When you like it, you call it insight.
When you don't like it, you call it jumping to a conclusion. You see, they're like, insight has to do with
changing your perspective, altering your perception and attention, but also participating in a process
that is self-organizing. You don't make an insight. You don't just receive an insight. You participate
in a self-organizing process. So this is why you can't think your way through these things. Thinking
matters. Don't misunderstand me. Propositions matter. I'm not saying they don't, but it's not just a matter of
arguments because that's not where the prior, the primary problem lies.
I remember you saying that, uh, some truths are only knowable through transformation.
Oh, totally.
And, uh, I was having a great conversation last night and we came up with this term of
unteachable lessons and an unteachable lesson. One of the best unteachable lessons I think
is money and success won't make you happy.
Yeah.
And, you know, it is a unique category of lesson where nobody gives the people trying to teach
it sympathy. Uh, they're derogated in a manner that, uh, no teacher would typically accept.
And I'm yet to, I, I, I know of nobody who has arrived at that realization.
Logically, they've arrived at it experientially. Um, I was trying to think about some other, uh,
ones that are not too dissimilar. I think, um,
um, don't, don't be, uh, swayed to falling in love with somebody who looks very pretty,
but has no morals or anything sort of deeper to do with you. You know, it's very much
the thing that I kind of came to realize, at least with the, some of the unteachable lessons,
I'm sure there's a million. Um, but the ones that I'd found were ones that sort of limbically
were very seductive in one form or another. They were about status. They were about acclaim. They
were about resources. They were about sex. They were about power. And, um, that was so salient
that what you end up with is this, you're at war. There is one hired version of yourself that goes,
ah, I remember the last time that I got into a relationship with a girl that was pretty and
kind of didn't really have much to say and we didn't really have much to do or whatever. And,
you know, that, that didn't end too well, but you know, she's just so hot. I can't not think
about it. And then, you know, the same with everybody else says that sort of money and success
didn't change any of the internal voids that they had, but that was them. I, I will be able
to thread the needle in a different way. And, uh, I just, I thought it was so funny that, uh,
unteachable lessons came to me last night, uh, knowing that I was going to speak to you today
and the some truths that are only knowable through transformation. I thought that was a nice,
uh, a nice parallel. That's powerful. I like that. Um, yeah,
LA Paul's work on transformative experience, uh, that, um, yeah, because we don't know
who we're going to be and what's it going to be like to be that other person until after we gone
through the transformation. So we can have all the propositions we want. We can even have some
relevant skills, but the perspective, the perspective of knowing, knowing what it's going
to be like the participatory, knowing who are we going to actually be? We won't know that until we
undergo the transformation. And so we draw very poor conclusions, uh, because, uh, we've been
sort of educated for quite some time since Descartes, um, uh, that truths are just accessible to
calculation. We should just be able to calculate all possible truths. Um, and that was to overturn an
older religious idea that no, no, many truths are, as you're indicating very powerfully, many important
truths are only disclosed to us after we commit to undergoing a fundamental transformation.
Uh, I think that's, I think that's deeply right. Um, now the issue around this is, well, if you're
ignorant, what do you do? And then here's where the imaginal comes back in, right? Um, so let's use
one of LA Paul's powerful examples, having a child. You don't know what it's like to be a parent until
you're a parent. And we were kind of talking about that a few minutes ago. You can read all kinds of books,
but they really don't help that much. Right. And you can even practice some skills, uh, sort of in
your head or on your friends or something. Um, but what do people do then? Well, what I've noticed
is a lot of people do, and some people are even noticing that other people do this is they get a
dog, they get a dog and they pretend, but it's not really pretends because it's actually a dog.
It's an intelligent living being that needs your attention and your care. And it's very demanding.
And I'm helping to raise a dog right now. And, you know, and so they get a dog and
they treat it like a little person. They name it and they talk to it and they, you know, sometimes
they'll even give it its own room and have family pictures and the dog is included. Um,
and so this is what's known, what I've been calling serious play. What we do is we set up this liminal
place. Uh, Winnicott talked about this as this transitional place where we're neither fully a
parent, but we're not just single anymore. We're in this like liminal place where we're doing this
very serious play by this kind of imagining through the dog, not imagining a dog, but imagining through
the dog, what it would be like to have a child that I'm responsible to. Now, the thing about the
dog is it's still an element of pretense because it's not a human child. And so you can do things
with the dog. Like you can say after three weeks, no, I'm not up. This isn't really for me. And then
you can find a new owner for the dog and nobody thinks you're a particularly immoral person. But
if you do that with your kid, now I'm three weeks in now, no, this isn't for me. I'm going to find
another here. Do you want my child? People think there's something and as they should, there's
something dramatically wrong with you. So we use, we need serious play, which is an imaginal practice
in order to try and get a taste so that we can properly commit ourselves to the transformations
that will disclose those unteachable truths. So let me give you a more concrete example that
goes back to your first thing. I'm going to use myself as an example, so I'm going to make myself
vulnerable here. I've not been what I would call successful in my romantic life. I've had lots of
relationships, some of them very long-term, but in many ways they did not bring out the best in me
and I did not act my best within them. I'll put it as succinctly as I could. So after my second,
isn't that a point of vulnerability? Second marriage fell apart. I'm on good terms with
both of my exes, by the way. But I realized that I had been doing what you were talking about.
I had a type that I found particularly attractive and this was probably driven largely by genetic
Darwinian factors. We sound like Plato now with the monster in our genitalia, right?
And I decided I was going to change my attraction radar. I was going to go,
not go towards the women that immediately were salient to me, sort of physically.
And instead, I tried to break against my type, which wasn't easy by the way, especially when you're
like feeling so vulnerable and that you'll never be loved again because the relationship has ended
and all that crap that that little thing says in your head. And I found this woman when she found me
and she wasn't my type. And because of that, and because I really wanted to be different on how I
entered into relationship, I allowed myself to be attracted in ways I hadn't been attracted before.
And I fell in love with her soul. And then only did I realize, and now to my great
joy, do I realize she's actually a very physically attractive woman. And my type that I find attractive
has completely shifted because of that. And that was powerful for me. And I'm not holding myself out
as any kind of exemplar for relationship advice. I'm saying that sometimes we have to be willing
to overcome our automatic salience projector, salient, what grabs our attention, what arouses us,
if we want to actually find deeper connection and meaning. And this woman and I, Sara and I, we have made
a lifetime commitment to each other because we have found that we reliably bring out the good in each
other, which is actually the basis for a relationship. And we realize that that is what you should base a
commitment on. Not as this person satisfying all of your wants and needs, not is this person, you know,
helping you with all your projects and helping you to self-actualize and all the stuff that we say in
California. But are the two of you reliably bringing out the good in each other such thatI texted her
today and I said, I love that I get to know you more and more while realizing that I'll never completely
grasp you. And so that is something I did not have access to as long as I was going according
to what I typically found salient. It's a beautiful story. And I've been thinking a lot recently about
why do you think that you know what's best for you? Like, why is it that you have, you know,
you had this assumption. I have a type. I have a type. I have a type. And there's a need for control.
There's a desire for control there. You know, I have a predictive model of how things are going
to unfold. I can therefore have a good example of the trajectory. I know exactly where this is
going to come into land, kind of-ish. And I know that maybe a couple of times this evidence has
shownyou're actually denying evidence, especially if you've had a couple of these things occur and
you go, well, ah, those ones didn't quite go the way that I wanted to. And this is something
different. Well, maybe different could lead to a different sort of an outcome. It's like, ah, no,
I'm pretty sure that the same will somehow lead to a different kind of an outcome. And yeah, as
in a world where people want to control, they do not like the idea of not being able to fully
predict where things are going to come into land. Reminding everybody, myself included, that you are
not necessarily the best judge of what is best for you. You don't actually always know. You can't always
predict what's best for you. And that's a lovely example of a time where perhaps you were right to
be wrong in that regard. Yeah. Thank you for saying that. I mean,
one of the hallmarks of modernity given to us from the period of the European Enlightenment
is this sort of putting on a pedestal, enfranchising autonomy, self-government. It's Kant's biggest
virtue. And there's value in that, again, because autonomy reminds us that we are simultaneously our
best friends and our worst enemy and that we are responsible for the content of our behavior and our
thoughts and our affect. And so that's important. I don't want to just go back, but it's also given us
this, and there is no other word for it, a lack of humility. It's given us an arrogance that we always
know what is best for us. And that's simply not true. In fact, we are really bad at discovering our
own self-deception. We are really bad at what's called affective forecasting. We're really bad at
predicting what will make us long-term happy and what will make us long-term really, really sad.
We're really bad at that. We're really bad at it. We're really bad at it because we fall prey to
hyperbolic discounting. That's a fancy-sounding term. It means we find present stimuli very salient
and long-term stimuli very non-salient. This is why it's hard to lose weight and it's hard to study
and all those kinds of other things because the chocolate cake is there or the party is there
and health and the exam are off in the future. And by the way, you can't argue yourself away from
that hyperbolic discounting. It doesn't help. Giving people lots of reason and evidence for why,
for example, why they should save for their retirement doesn't really help them do that.
But if they do some serious play by imagining their future self as somebody, a family member that
they've always loved and taken care of, and they form that affective bonding, then they'll start to
save for their retirement kind of thing. So there are lots of ways in which we are not
the best authority. We have to become adults in which we take responsibility. And that's important,
and I don't want to denigrate that, but that's only one half of maturation. John Rusin, I think,
is right when he talks about the main part of maturity is facing up. I like that phrase. It's
beautiful. Facing up to reality. And facing up to reality is humbling. You're looking to something.
When you're looking up, that's a humbling stance, and you're facing it. You're confronting a reality
that is making you look up, right? And so that is an attitude in which you realize that you don't know
best. So for example, as things started to succeed for me, I had the Verveke Foundation, but I was
blessed by terrific people. But I asked them to act as a constant check on the fact that I could fall prey
to self-aggrandize to self-aggrandizement, all hubris, arrogance, all the proclivities we see in social media
media people. And I committed them to this because I did not trust that I would be a good enough
person for determining that issue. And we've done things specifically, like we pivoted away from
Voices with Verveke, and I was doing all these videos, and we just do now a couple videos a month,
and I've become very clear. We now have what's called the lectern. My role, I'm a teacher.
People are not my fans. They're not my followers. They're my students if they want to study what I'm
teaching. That's my role. That's who they are. And I'm emphasizing quality over quantity. A lot of
things to try and prioritize virtue over success. And that initiative wasn't my initiative. It was the
initiative from Ryan Barton and Christopher Mastipietro at the Verveke Foundation. But as soon as they said it,
I recognized that it was true. So thank God for that.
This is one of those moments. My background when I first started the show was a sort of productivity bro
world. I was very much trying to wrangle chaos and have the right notion template and the morning
routine and time blocking and the calendar and all of this stuff, trying to create some sense of
organization out of what had been a pretty sort of messy twenties. And it's funny that even in things
like this, you know, we're talking about transcendent. We're talking about, you know, accounting for the
various machinations and ways that your ego is going to pervert the incentives and, you know,
your higher calling and how do we really pay this forward in the best way and so on and so forth.
And what it comes down to in some ways are an operational set of principles, like that you need
some hard and fast rules. You need to actually put some bright lines in the sand and sort of draw
those around you. And I've got it in my head sort of thinking about people for whom that approach is
very seductive. I would probably put myself in that category that again, if I just have the perfect
to-do list template, then all of my problems will be sorted, et cetera, et cetera. Let's say that
somebody is operationally pretty effective when it comes to that sort of stuff. What are some of the
practices that you like, that you use the most yourself to get you out of that kind of mode,
to get you out of the mode of logic, of reason, of rationality, of logistics, of operations,
and get you into a more embodied awe, dread, joy kind of sense? Because I feel like that's important.
So we've been talking, this ultimately goes back to sort of a compilation put together by Nathan
Vanderpool, who I was working with. We talk about dime. We talk about these four dimensions.
The dialogical, I'll come back to each one in a minute. The imaginal, which I've been talking about a
lot, the mindful, both meditation and contemplation, sitted and moving, and embodiment. So you need
these four dimensions. You need practices in all four of these dimensions, and you need sets of practices
because there is no panacea practice. Practices have strengths and weaknesses, and you need to align
them so they're correcting and compensating for each other. So one of my standard examples is
meditation is training attention. Meditation is you're stepping back and looking at the lens through
which you're normally looking through at the world. You're trying to pay attention to your mental
framing. This is meditation. The problem with that is you need to determine if any intervention,
well, I stilled my mind. Well, does that allow you to see better into the world? And you have to do
contemplative practices where you look out and see if you're seeing the world more deeply, more
clearly. You have to to and fro between them. You have seated practices where you're sitting,
right? But then you should do moving practices where you're trying to carry mindfulness into your
movement. So I do like tai chi chuan and things like that. You need imaginal practices
where you're engaging your imagination not for entertainment, but you're doing that serious play
that allows you to taste what it might be like to be somebody other than who you currently are,
and how you might identify with that. And those are very important practices.
So dialogical practices, we have a bunch of those. We have, oh, let me give you an example of an
imaginal practice. Lectio Divina, which is reading a text in an imaginal fashion, not just reading it to
get information. You're trying to take up the text as a serious play, as something imaginal through
which you're trying to see the world differently, take a different way of taking perspectives you
haven't taken before, and taste what the transformation might be like that that text is
providing you, that other voice, that other perspective. The sage that you're reading is like a parent to a
child as the adult, as the child is to the adult, the adult is to the sage, and you're doing this imaginal work
in order to try and undergo a transformation. That's a kind of imaginal practice, Lectio Divina.
You want to do dialogical practices. We have a whole bunch. We've been teaching on
the Awaken to Meaning platform where you can go now, and there's a whole website where you can do all of the practices.
You can take courses. There's drop-in things. My good friend, Taylor Barrett, by the way, that is now
running autonomously, separate from John Dravicki. I get nothing from that other than the satisfaction of
knowing that some of my ideas have been put into practice, and Taylor's a good friend of mine.
And so we have what a practice called dialectic into dialogos, which is how can you talk,
how can two people enter into this mutual midwifing, this fellowship where they're trying to give,
I'm trying to help you to give deeper birth to yourself, and you're trying to help me. We're
trying to do that in a reciprocally opening fashion. And how can we do it with like three or four people?
So that sort of gets into a shared flow state where we start to be drawn into those kinds of life-giving
conversations, which we've all had, because they take on a life of our own, and they take us to places
we didn't think we could go to. We don't necessarily end up agreeing, but we all say,
wow, I never thought I could get here, and I couldn't have got here on my own.
Those kinds of practices. We're just putting the final touches on a practice we've been
working on, cultivating, developing for the past year or so, in which you teach people a Socratic
practice of go into something, a deeply personal problem you're having, and then how can you go
through a set of, with the help of other people's, a set of transformations on your perspective, and
also on your sense of identity, so that you can go from it being your personal problem, which is just
yours, to an existential dilemma that is probably shared with many people. And then once you get at the
level of existential dilemma, the tradition can talk to you and tell you what virtue might be relevant
to the existential dimension, and then you can then address that part of it, and then you bring that
back into and transform your personal problem. We're doing things like that.
Where can people go? Where should they go if they want to check out more of that?
AwakenToMeaning.org. It's a platform. That last thing, which is called the Socratic search space,
we're just going to roll it out in the next month or so. The Dialectic and Dialogos, you can do that.
Philosophical Fellowship, you can do that. You can learn about Lectio Divina, meditation,
contemplation, various other kinds of practices.
That's so awesome. John, I appreciate the heck out of you. I really have to say as well,
it's beautiful to see you smitten. It's really lovely. It genuinely is, mate. You know, I think
good people deserve good relationships, and I'm very glad that you've managed to find yours.
So what can people expect next? You've kind of rounded out this chapter.
When was the first Meaning Crisis video put on YouTube?
February 2019.
Okay. Yeah. So a good half decade journey on one thing.
Right. Well, the book is only part one.
Right.
There's part two coming out, which is the second half.
That'll have even more revisions in it because all the scientific work on relevance realization
has gone through a lot of revision and collaboration with other people publishing papers
like this year and stuff like that. The next thing is, well, I've got a bunch of books coming out.
I've got a book on, well, I'm working on Einstein and Spinoza's God, and then a book called Reimagining
Religion, and then a book by Greg Enriquez. We've got a lot of that written on consciousness. That's coming out.
The big project is the Philosophical Silk Road, which is going to be my next big multimedia endeavor.
It's going to be sort of at four levels of presentation. One is, well, it's based on this
thesis. This is what's next. I made a fundamental mistake in Awakening for the Meaning Crisis.
I thought the solution was to engineer an ecology of practices, a religion that's not a religion,
failing to realize that's exactly the framing that I was criticizing throughout.
So I fell prey to a very serious performative contradiction. Because I realized, like that
example of the living conversation, the sacred, you can't manufacture it. You can't engineer it. It has
to show up with a life of its own, or it's not the sacred. It's not that fount of rejuvenating meaning
that is deeply transformative of individuals and communities. But what's happening, and what I've
seen since all of the connections that were formed by Awakening for the Meaning Crisis is communities
around the world and things happening in academic cognitive science and philosophy and psychology and
biology, what I call the advent of the sacred. It's like sacredness is trying to be born in a new way
for us, I think, as a response toI'll be Hegel here for a second, so this is my only technicality.
This is the Weltgeist, the spirit of reality that's challenging the Zeitgeist, the spirit of the
times of the Meaning Crisis. And so I want to do this. In fact, it's not that I want to do this. I feel called
to do this. One of the things I'm going to do is I want to try and teach by undergoing a pilgrimage. I
want to go to the various places in the world where the sages of three great traditions that sort of built
comprehensive ways for people to deeply dialogue with each otherthe Neoplatonic tradition that runs
through Christianity and Judaism and Islam. So I want to talk about, right, I want to talk about,
you know, Maximus the Confessor or Nicholas of Cousins, and I'm going to go there, or Clement of
Alexandria or Suravardi the Sufi, right? I'm going to go there and I'm going to walk and talk and live
and really undergo and try and make myself vulnerable to hearing these people. I'm going to go to India
or, you know, with all of the Vedanta and everything wrapped around it. And Vedanta is like wrapped with
Tantra and Jainism and original Buddhism. And then I want to go to Japan because there's Zen,
because Zen integrates Buddhism and Daoism and Shinto, and get all three of these. Like,
what would it be like to do the philosophical Silk Road, create a lingua philosophica,
so we could engage in these, not just an ecology of practices, but an ecology of traditions,
where we could really deeply talk to each other, and people can travel and transform and maybe
return and recover their home or travel and find a new home. That's going to be the upper level. Then
below that is going to be a lecture series, like Awakening from the Meaning Crisis, where I go through
each one of these thinkers and explain them in great detail. And then below that is going to be
specific video essays on more technical topics, like comparing the non-duality in Vedanta to the
non-duality in Zen, for example, or Neoplatonism. And then below that, we have what's called the
Codex. We have a whole bank of volunteers taking all of my language, and they're creating like a Wikipedia
of it, where there's... And it's being written at multiple levels of accessibility. Somebody in grade 10,
completed high school, you know, all these levels. There's cross-referencing, there's diagrams,
there's practices you can undertake to get a deeper understanding of the concepts. And so there's
going to be these four tiers, and there's going to be like a narrative structure and an argumentative
structure, right, and a reflective structure. It's going to be this. And the hope is that that,
and that a lot of the teaching will not go just in what I'm saying, but what I'm undergoing,
and how I'm being transformed. There's going to be people that are going to travel with me in various
places and meet me in various places. And the hope is to open people up to the advent of the sacred so
they can properly orient to receiving it, so that we can really transformatively trust each other in the
way we need to in order to address the meeting crisis.
Well, I'm glad after taking on such a medium-sized topic, you're taking it a little bit smaller for
the next one. Very reassuring that you're going to keep it nice and niche. John, I appreciate the
heck out of you, mate. I can't wait until you get whatever you've got coming out next out,
and I would love to bring you back on whenever you're ready.
I'll always come back and talk to you, Chris. Thank you very much, and thank you for allowing me to
shamelessly plug my new book, which I really appreciate.
Everyone should go and check it out. I appreciate you, mate. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Chris.
Do you think that your algorithm on YouTube is a bit of a god? Is it able to know things about you
that you don't know about yourself? Well, the YouTube gods have selected this episode
specifically for you, bespoke. So go and go and check it out.
