It led me to understand why life makes it so complicated. The complexity is the robustness of life.
Let's talk about the sort of road leading up to the to the modelling of the cardiovascular cells.
You'll have to indulge me in this. I assume you're all interested but if not I want to hear
about this. I mean how did you end up coming on to this idea of modelling? It was so
revolutionary at the time. Well it was Ganesh. You know the modelling that had been done previously
was phenomenal. Alan Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley they received the Nobel Prize in Physiology and
Medicine in 1963 for the work they did in 1952 which was modelling nerve with a set of differential
equations describing the movements of the protein transporters. I mean it's just phenomenal that that
length of time ago people were able to do that. They were ingenious. I was just a student in 1958 so
just six years later and I'd struggled through that paper. The 1952 paper is phenomenal. I struggled
through it because I didn't really know calculus at that time and I was so taken by the idea you can
make biology be like physics. You know the physicists are computing the movements of the planets. We can
compute the movements of the molecules and could we get the heartbeat out of it? Well I was doing work with
a very interesting biologist or physiologist Otto Hutter who had escaped from Vienna when Hitler marched
in. Well actually he escaped before he marched in which is very good because he got to England and
became a professor at University College London. I became his graduate student and he introduced me to
measuring potassium currents through the membranes of cardiac cells which we did and we identified two
particular potassium channels. I then wondered you know could it be that those equations that Alan
Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley had developed for reproducing the electrical activity of nerve could be modified
with the equations I was developing for those potassium channels in the heart and would that explain why the
heart beats like this because we need to know. And so I asked is there a calculator? Well yes they showed
me a Brunswicker calculator. I tell you it was a machine you dialed numbers on it you dialed another
number over here and you multiplied the two by going crunch crunch and if you were clever at this and do it
quickly enough and wrote the answers down and then used it to do your integrations. Well in about 10
years time you might compute about two seconds of activity in the heart so I well this is no good I
need a thesis rather earlier than that. So I went to the guardians of what then was an extremely precious
machine the mercury for anti-mercury computer which was a valve computer the valves rather like what you
see in some amplifiers those special amplifiers that hi-fi people like to use they were very suspicious of
a biologist of all people coming to them and asking for time on this extraordinary machine. Most of the
people who came to them were of course x-ray crystallographers people doing astronomy or particle physics they were the
three that I remember very clearly and the first reaction was you you don't know enough programming
and you certainly don't seem to know enough mathematics. They were quite right so I crept in
to the back of the lectures given to the engineers in mathematics I went up a learning curve as fast as
I could I went back to the guardians of the mercury computer and said well I you know I've written at
least a few lines of code you know could you give me time they did they said well you'll need about
two hours and yes we can afford two hours we'll give you from two to four a.m.
Oh well that's when I destroyed my circadian rhythm but there's another story
anyway the fact was that simply putting in those equations for the potassium channels that I'd worked on
with Otto Hutter out came rhythm and I remember talking with a physics oriented biophysicist at
University College London Rolf Niederkerker and he was also working on the heart and the conversation
went roughly like this he of course was far senior to me I was just a young student he said Dennis I think
one of the biggest issues in understanding the heart is what causes his rhythm I thought well
I've just shown that but could I bring myself to talk to that senior person and say well I think I've
just done it I just felt so small and yet what I'd found was what makes this happen well now yes and no
I mean it worked but what we found out much later and it takes around 50 to 60 years to work out the
whole story is it ain't that simple two potassium channels and one sodium channel is by no means
not enough because if that was what your heart was doing at the moment most of you have been dead
before you came to listen to me because it's extremely fragile and what we know of course is that nature
builds in all kinds of redundancy to give strength to the system so that it doesn't fail if one gene
drops out or a mutation happens most of the time that doesn't happen thank goodness so there there's a
rough story of how I got into using computers I love that story but also talking about this redundancy
let's take a little sidestep into your personal life if we may yeah you know being a scientist can
be quite demoralizing at times you already alluded to the fact that sometimes you feel like the smallest
cog in a very large machine so what what mechanisms do you feel helped you get through your time in
academia that made you feel more robust gave you those robust pathways support mechanisms you sort
of alluded to music yes I assume there were people so yeah what what were your mechanisms of support
well I think that's a bit like um the monk in the monastery wondering whether he can go through with
this and all his vows and so on because you're working in a science lab is like that isn't it you just
keep going you know most of the time you make no astounding discoveries at all you you keep going um
no what broke out for me about 20 years later um was attraction to music and very particularly because
I had by then bought an incredible old ruin of a house in the south of France where I found they don't
speak just French they speak the language of the medieval troubadours the Occitans poets and I
thought well there's there's there's there's my vocation I will learn all of this so I joined music
groups down there to work out how to sing this language and so on I now run a music group called
the Oxford troubadours we perform wow we performed in the Sheldonian theatre on the 6th of June I think it was
this year to a crowd of about 500 I mean imagine it a language nobody knows well I know it and there are
a few others in England who know it singing songs that most people don't know about and we get beautiful
audiences for me I think that was the break from the monastic life if I can call it that of trying to be
a really good scientist just keeping going and starting to find another aspect of life but then
it informed my science why is my first book on a systems biological theme called the music of life
and why is the next book called dance to the tune of life which was published six years ago by Cambridge
University Press sorry for the advert but there we are um yes it's a very good book Richard Dawkins
told me it was a very good book and we both we totally disagree on everything except that we've
both written good books now anyway what I felt once I'd learned that that first model built 60 years ago
was very fragile I it led me to understand why life makes it so complicated the complexity
is the robustness of life you wouldn't fly an aircraft if you knew that the only system that will control
the flight of that aircraft was a single computer program there is a backup and that's what nature does
all the time now why is this related to music it's simply that when you when you play an instrument
or you learn how to sing you are producing a process the process itself is the performance
it isn't in the score well it is Schubert probably had it in his head but that that's the point you see
it is actually performance that gives what is important and I I interpret biology to be that
the way to understand the way in which genes play their role in the organism is that they are actually
caused to dance to the tune we play now that's a curious way of putting it but if you read my book
you might become convinced to continue watching this video click the link in the top left or in the
description below or visit iai.tv for more debates and talks from the world's leading thinkers on today's biggest ideas
