Welcome back. My guest today on this third episode of the mini
series, It's Not What They Told You, is definitely one of the
thinkers, authors and commentators that have really
enlightened me about some of the realities of today's economy.
John Rubino is a financial analyst by training. He is, as I
said, an author and a commentator known for his criticism or
critique of of global economics and specifically in
relationship to debt. Don is a he started his career on as a
Wall Street financial analyst, and he became an author or a
co-author of five books. Two of my favorites are The Money Bubble
and the collapse of the dollar. He founded dollarcollapse.com in
2004 and sold it in 2022. And he now has a John Rubens sub stack
where he shares a lot of his thoughts about the economy. John
is not shy to be brutally honest about what's happening. So I have
to say that today's conversation is going to be a little bit
shocking for some of you in terms of the reality of how fragile the
economic realities that we've created over the last 50 years
have become. And so I have to say for the faint hearted, I have to
give a bit of warning. You know, this is 18 plus this is going to
scare you. But and I don't mean to scare you and I don't want to
scare you. But I really have to say that a lot of people have to
wake up to the financial realities of what we're about to start
embarking upon, especially in the US and slightly also in other
Western countries. So please accept my apology for scaring you a
little bit as I speak to one of my favorite teachers about the
economy that we are about to to experience John. John, thank you so
much for being here today. Really, really wonderful to have
you. Lots to talk about today.
That's great to meet you. And yeah, you're right. There is a
lot to talk about these days.
I know it is. It is actually a very, very confusing time, right? You
know, most people in the last, you know, two to three years just
felt a massive increase in the cost of everything. They you know,
everyone is really struggling to to make sense of where all of this
is coming from. You know, the newspaper headlines will talk about
inflation, but what is causing the inflation and so on. And my hope
for today is for, you know, the everyday person to to sort of
understand that this is not a problem that started a year or two
ago, that this is a very, you know, it goes back a very long way. I
think, you know, I probably say 1971, 1945, maybe even earlier
than that. So would you would you start us off with an
understanding of, you know, for the non economist of the world?
Where does this start? Where does the where do the challenges we
have with money begin?
Well, today's challenges and they are huge. To understand them
probably requires a trip all the way back to the conception of
money, you know, what what is money? Because you can't
understand how we yeah, because we've screwed it up. But we
know what it we have to know what it is to understand how we've
screwed things up. So let's go all the way back to the
beginnings of human civilization, every, every culture starts
out doing barter, basically trading things back and forth. You
know, if I've got arrowheads, and you've got beaver pelts, we get
together and cut a deal, since we both in need on some level,
arrows and beaver pelts. But as societies get more
complex, that process gets a lot more complicated. Now, you
know, for instance, if you're a speech therapist, and you need
pork chops, then you can't just barter one for the other very
easily. So every society, as it becomes more complex, designates
something to serve the function of money, which is kind of a go
between and a community communications medium, it allows
everybody to have a shared conception of value and to convey
that conception in a way that everybody understands. And that
makes it possible to, you know, to do speech therapy, and then
gain money for doing that, and then use that money to buy those
pork chops. And so it's completely necessary as a tool for a modern
society. But early on, you know, we didn't know exactly what should be
money. So everything got tried seashells and big stone discs,
and bales of tea and human slaves and animals. And turns out
most of those things, for various reasons, don't work very well as
money, in a lot of cases, because you can't chop them up to
make change out of them very easily. Yeah. So most of us carry
them around very, very easy. Yeah, that that too, you know, and so
just, it those things didn't work, they got tried, they got
abandoned. And most societies settled on pieces of metal, like
copper or silver or gold, because those things could be fungible, you
know, you can make millions of them in the same size. And then
everybody kind of understands what they're getting when when they
sell something for copper or silver or gold. And in the longer
term, gold and silver turned out to be the rarest, and among the
most durable kinds of money. And they so they ended up being
society's money for 1000s of years, you can go all the way
back to the Egyptians and maybe before to find gold and silver
being highly valued stores about you. In other words, you you
get some gold and silver, and it's going to hold its value for
however long you need it to hold. And so 100 years later, your
ancestors come back and or your successors come back and that
gold and silver that you put away is still valuable. So that's
the way it well, it stayed for 1000s of years, most of human
civilization civilization was on what is called a gold standard,
sometimes a silver standard, but usually a gold standard, where
gold was the money. Sometimes societies would create pieces of
paper or something like that to represent the gold that the
government held in trust to back its money. But it was understood
that that paper was a representation of the real money,
which was that going Yeah. And so that went on for, you know,
the such a long time that everybody just assumed that was
the environment, you know, there was gold was money, and that was
that. But with time, government started to be frustrated by the
fact that that money was a real thing. And if they wanted to invade a
neighbor, or to buy off a constituency for an election,
or whatever, they had to go out and get real money. And that
limited their ability to do the things they wanted. And it was
very frustrating. So every once in a while, a government would try
to get around the idea of gold as being real money, and they would
create paper currency that wasn't backed by anything. And human
nature being what it is, they would issue too many pieces of paper
currency, it's, there would be a boom, but then there would be a
bust when the value of that paper currency just collapsed. But that
always happened. In the context of a sound money world sound
money being something that's real, and that governments can't
just make more of out of thin air. So that one currency would
collapse, but everybody else will be on the gold standard, and it
would be not that big of a deal. Lately, though, in 1971, in
fact, we tried an experiment, the human race tried an experiment
where we took all the major currencies off the remnants of the
gold standard. In other words, they weren't, the currencies were no
longer linked to gold. They weren't representations of gold. They
were just pieces of paper or electronic impulses that were
whatever the government said they were.
So let me let me let me, you know, just make sure that everyone
understands this before 1971. And mainly since I think 1945, when
Bretton Woods started tying everything to the dollar, while the
dollar is tied to the to gold, you couldn't have an extra dollar in
the market unless you had the amount of of gold that is
corresponded to it, correct?
You could have extra dollars in the market. And that's what broke
the system down is that you can create more dollars, but people
have to trust those dollars. So you can create more up to a
certain point. But once you go beyond that point, people stop
trusting that this dollar that they have in their hand is
actually functionally backed by gold. In other words, that you
can you can convert it into gold anytime you want. And then
they start trying to convert it into gold, right? And that's
yeah, once the trust is lost, you said you sort of tell
yourself, I want my real money, not that piece of paper.
Yes, yeah. So in 1971, as you said, there was an agreement
prior to that called the Bretton Woods Agreement that set up
basically a dollar standard, the dollar was linked to gold. But
all the other currencies in the world were linked to the dollar, but
it was still you know, since it began with gold, it was still
kind of sort of a gold standard. But the US wanted to fund the
Vietnam War and the Great Society social programs at the same
time in the 1960s and 1970s that required them to create a lot of
new dollars and send them out into the world. And the trading
partners of the US were getting too many dollars more than they
wanted. And they were coming back to the US and said, let us
convert these into gold because the US was required to do that with
its trading partners, give them gold for dollars. And the US
finally under Richard Nixon in 1971 said, No, I don't think
we're going to do that anymore. And they closed the gold window.
That was the term for it back then. It was supposed to be a
temporary measure to keep speculators from threatening the
value of the dollar. But of course, once the governments of the
world found themselves with currencies that they could create
in unlimited quantities, in other words, they could create money
out of thin air, with all the power and freedom that that
implies, nobody wanted to go back. So since 1971, all the big
countries of the world have had currencies that they could just
create out of thin air on an electronic printing press or a
physical printing press, and and use it for stuff. And so the US
today, as a globe spanning military empire, and the cradle to
grave, entitlement system paid for with borrowed money, basically,
you know, there was money we create, to finance the debt that
we take on, in order to fund our social programs. And that's led to a
spectacular boom, you know, most people look back on the last 50
years as a time of relative prosperity, because stocks were
going up and house prices were going up and people's jobs were
paying them more money year after year. But what it was, was we
were creating too many pieces of currency. And that was changing
basically the measuring stick that we use to, to value things
out there. And those things were going up in price, not in value,
but in price, because the value of the dollar and the euro and
the yen, and pound sterling and the Chinese yuan, they were all
going down in value. And so now we're at the end point or close
to the end point in that experiment, because we've gotten
all the good stuff out of going deeply into debt. You know, when
you borrow money, you feel rich for a little while and all your
neighbors think you're rich, because you bought a bunch of
stuff with the credit cards you're maxing out. Well, that's,
that's what we're doing as a society as a global society. And so
now comes the hard part where we've taken on immense amounts of
debt to, you know, fight all the wars we want to fight and buy
off all the constituencies to win all the elections. And now the
the cost of that debt is becoming the main aspect of our
financial system. The US government has taken on 10s of
trillions of dollars in just the last 30 or 40 years of new debt.
That debt is costing us over a trillion dollars a year just in
interest right now. And so on different scales, it's the same
thing in Europe, it's the same thing in Japan. And so you're
looking at a lot of governments facing the potential of
bankruptcy now, because if they keep interest rates really low in
order to minimize their debt costs, then inflation picks up. In
other words, people see that the currency is being inflated away, and
they don't want to hold it anymore. So they buy real stuff. And
that makes the price of real things go up, which we know of as
inflation. So the value of the currency starts to plunge, if
interest rates are held too low, which is what happened in the
last few years. But if you raise interest rates to prevent your
currency from just evaporating, then the interest cost on the debt
that you've taken on becomes ruinous. And that's where we are now
facing where we know we're vastly over indebted in every major
society around the world except for Russia. And the interest
costs on that debt are becoming overwhelmingly painful, while
inflation is above target. So we're in a situation now where no
matter what we do, we, we make one problem worse by trying to fix
another problem. And that's for years, you know, sound money, people
have been saying, Well, someday we'll be in this box where
there's no fix, and then everything will blow up. We're
in that box. Now we're in kind of a death spiral financially. And
that's why things suddenly seem so disturbingly hopeless, and we
seem so incompetent. It's because we've reached the point where
there's no fix.
Yeah, we're paying for for years and years and years of mistakes
that are now piling up to the point where if you fix one side, the
other side blows up.
Yes. And it was predictable, if you knew anything about human
nature in 1971, when we said, Oh, well, we'll just, you know, we'll
just have currencies that are what we say they are, and we'll
create as much as we need to run the government the way we want
it. You probably could forecast that we'd end up in a place like
this, you know, grossly over indebted, headed for a gigantic
financial crisis. But apparently, back then, they, they were
enjoying having the power to make money out of thin air so much that
they didn't pay attention.
I mean, in a, in a, in a, in a system that basically says you're
elected for elected for four years or for eight years at most,
you like say, okay, let me show up for with a lot of results by
borrowing money that someone else has to pay back, right? And I
think that becomes reality. So let, let, let me try to, to, to, to
state this again, but in, you know, in, in, in doing so, see if I
understood you correctly. So it's almost like, you know, if a
society wants to buy new things, you know, they need to buy
cement and copper and, and, you know, steel and whatever, to be
able to build things or to buy things for the society, you know,
you look into your safe and you say, I have a hundred dollars
for copper, then I'll buy copper for a hundred dollars post
Nixon post, you know, uh, the end of the gold standard is, you
know, you looked in the safe, you didn't find the hundred
dollars. So what did you do? You printed them, right? You
basically the government was like, yeah, you know what I
have, I'm, I have the printing press. I might as well create a
hundred more. Now here's the question. Isn't that what the
government is supposed to do anyway? I mean, most people
think that money comes from government. Government is
supposed to build money, you know, or give us money somehow.
So why is that a problem? You, you basically said it's because
it's not linked to gold. So it's not linked to anything specific,
right? So it's, it, it, it basically means that I had a
thousand dollars yesterday. Now I have a, a, a, a thousand
100 because I printed a hundred, but I, but, but the value of all
the things that back this up is still a thousand. That basically
means every dollar lots, a lot lost a little bit of value when
I increased the number. Does that sound right to you?
Yeah. There, there's one more aspect of the gold standard that I
should have mentioned that, that I didn't. So I'll mention it now.
When you link your currency to something that is real and can't
be created out of thin air and is therefore kind of rare, that
limits the number of new pieces of currency you can create. Say
you're backing the, the U S dollar with 40% gold. That means the
number of dollars outstanding can never go above the reciprocal of
40%. So that limits the supply of currency. And since gold, we, we
basically get gold by mining it. We get it out of the ground and we
usually increase the, um, the amount of gold that exists by a
one, about 1% per year. Yeah. So being on a gold standard means
your currency can never increase in supply by more than 1% a year.
And since human populations have increased by about 1% a year, that
means the, uh, the amount of money per capita didn't go up for two or
300 years. Uh, and that means prices of things cannot go up. In fact,
in a, in a sound money system, you have deflation prices go down. As we
get more productive, we learn how to do things better in a, in the
context of fixed money supply. And so a healthy society has prices go
down each year. And that's one of the ways you can tell that we're an
unhealthy society because prices go up each year. But yeah, the reason
people don't get this is because there's been no reason to understand it.
We've had 50 years of, um, what they call a credit super cycle when the
amount of debt was being raised year after year after year, and people
were benefiting from it on paper. In other words, your house was
getting more expensive. Your stock portfolio was going up. Oh, and one
more, a very important aspect of inflation is that it affects
generations, different generations differently. So the people who were
there on the ground floor, which is to say the baby boomers and the
post-World War II generation, um, they bought their houses when they
were cheap, they bought their stock portfolios when they were cheap, and
they benefited from all the credit we created that, that raised the
value of financial assets. So boomers got very rich, you know, we, we, my
generation really made out from the inflation that we engineered by
having, uh, you know, fiat currency and, um, successive generations have
found it harder and harder to get by because, you know, look at
millennials right now and think, think about their ability to buy the
house that their parents bought as a starter house. And that house is
now $450,000. And, and there's a 7% mortgage on it, which, which costs
more than the average millennial makes to buy. So we've kind of, my
generation have kind of screwed over, um, our kids and grandkids by
generating a big inflation that benefited us and hurting them in the
process. So that's, that's one of the really despicable things about a, a
currency that the government controls and that the government inflates away is
it, it helps one group of people, the politicians who are there, the, uh, the
people who own houses, own fine art and farmland and stock portfolios, uh, but
it hurts everybody else.
But that's also a very interesting, a very interesting, uh, angle to this,
which is the fact that even if you were a baby boomer, but you didn't
participate in the debt lifestyle, you would not have been able to buy that
house. So, you know, if you remember in the early years of sort of like
Robert Kawasaki is rich dad, poor dad, and the whole idea of, you know, buy, buy a
house, mortgage it. And then the value of the house will increase more than the
money that you're paying into the, into the interest. And basically you're sort
of, you know, if you rent it, you're getting the house for free and so on is,
is sort of like encouraging everyone to participate in that debt, you know,
uh, funding approach. Basically, you know, if you waited as a baby boomer until
you were 35, when you had enough money to actually buy what you want, you were by
definition, losing the value, uh, of all of that inflation that was happening,
that you, you know, others who participated in the debt society benefited
from.
Yes. And, and this is another, um, really negative aspect of an inflate period
of inflation. Like we've lived through is that it encourages you to borrow money,
because if you see that the currency is losing value, which is to say that house
prices are going up and stocks are going up. Uh, it encourages you to take on as much
debt as possible by as much house or as many stocks or as much farmland or oil wells or
whatever as possible, because they're going to become more valuable with time.
So you get a society where, um, taking on immense amounts of debt becomes ingrained at
every level of society. It's not just something that the government does or big companies do.
It's basically, everybody sees it as a way to progress financially. In other words,
to build something, because like you said, the house is going to go up more in value than your
mortgage interest rate costs you. So in the end, you end up with home equity that for a lot of
people, um, over the last 50 years, their home equity was basically the one financial decision
that they did in their lifetime. And that was enough. You know, if you bought a house in California
in 1959 and just lived in it, you're a multimillionaire now, and you didn't have to do
anything else. All you had to do was pay that mortgage off, um, and then just cover your taxes
and, and your food and stuff like that. And you're, you're a millionaire. So that kind of an idea,
and, and, you know, call that one aspect of the American dream. People just assume that that was
the case in my generation, but ask a millennial or a Gen, Gen Zer about something like that. And
they'll say, no, that's, first of all, I can't buy, I can't afford the house. Second of all,
there's no way that house goes up in value enough to cover my immense mortgage. So I would be crazy
to buy a house, even if I could. They're right also, because they came in so late that the game
is over. And, uh, and that's why politics around the world, part one reason why politics is so, um,
dysfunctional now is that you've got this huge generation of people who don't feel like the
system works for them. They, they no longer trust the people in charge to make decisions that benefit
them because the people in charge are making decisions that benefit basically an aristocracy.
Now we've got one or 2% of the people out there who own all the assets. So when there's inflation
and stocks, bonds, and real estate go up in value, that rich 1% gets even richer. And the people who
are working for a living, uh, find that their wages don't keep up with the cost of living. And so
they actually regress. And that's where we are now. We've got 50% of the country in the U S regressing.
They're getting poorer each year instead of richer while a handful of people are getting
immensely rich right now. So this is a very, very eyeopening remark here, because if you are rich
and you own assets today, inflation makes you richer by definition, those assets are going to
continue to go higher. And so if you have a house worth a million dollars, it becomes $1.2 million.
You're making more money while everyone who's being paid minimum wage, uh, who doesn't have that asset,
uh, is now further and further away from the dream of ever buying a house because houses
are becoming more expensive. So, you know, what one side is getting richer and the other
is getting poorer. Uh, and, and that's unfortunately becomes a question on the politician who needs
to make a choice. Usually they make the choice to benefit the richer, uh, you know, but, but,
but knowing that by doing that, they're, you know, really penalizing the poor.
I, I'm not even sure the politicians know that because they live in Washington DC, or at least
the federal politicians, and they talk to other rich people all day long, you know, they, they spend
their day talking to constituents, trying to get them to give money to their campaigns and, um, um,
lobbyists who speak for the pharmaceutical companies and the, uh, defense companies and the big banks.
Uh, so I, I think we've basically, um, by this point, we've created an aristocracy of people who
basically benefit from all the forces that we've talked about and who dictate government policy
to keep that gravy train rolling, um, to take one of many examples. Well, let me, let me go through the,
just a few of the weird statistics now, you know, a handful of big banks basically own the financial
system right now. And when a new president comes in, he takes somebody from Goldman Sachs or Citigroup to run
the treasury department and the fed. Um, and so they continue government policies that benefit their
old employers and their future employers. Um, the military industrial complex basically dictates US foreign
policy, which is why we have all these wars because wars are, wars are incredibly profitable for Raytheon
and general dynamics. And then they take some of the billions of dollars they make, hand it back to
political campaigns to reelect the politicians who started our forever wars. And it just goes,
goes in a cycle like that. And, you know, big food sells us, um, stuff that's not really food
that makes us sick, uh, but they make a fortune doing it. Uh, the big pharmaceutical companies sell
us drugs that treat the symptoms of the, the lifelong chronic illnesses that the, uh, processed food that
we eat causes. And then they funnel the money back into, uh, advertisements on, um, CNN and campaign
contributions to, uh, uh, the, the people who fund HSA or health and human services in the U S and,
and it just goes on and on, you know, it's, it's one feedback loop after another that we have created
because we have a non-sound currency because we gave the government, the ability to create money out of
thin air. They hand that money to the big banks who hand it to their favorite clients who get richer and
richer. And then in effect, end up controlling the government. Um, and that's where we are, you know, every,
every election basically puts the same people back in charge. Their policies never change. And, uh, the 1% gets richer and
richer while the, the bottom 50% gets poorer and poorer until we end up with something like a French
revolution kind of rebellion. You know, that's, uh, that's what I think the, uh, the billionaire class
is most afraid of now is something literally like a French revolution. There's, there's some funny stories
associated with that. I'll, I'll, I'll do this later if we have time.
I want to come back to this, but I, I really have a question that I think puzzles a lot of people before we go
there. So if the government can print dollars, why does it need to borrow? You know, so why, why is
it that there is so much debt, $35 trillion that the U S owes, uh, you know, in tragedy bonds sort of
to foreign countries and foreign, you know, rich people? Why?
Well, actually, um, it's kind of a fig leaf to hide what we're really doing. There's a, um, an economic idea
called modern monetary theory that says what you just said that, you know what, if we can create
money out of thin air, why are we borrowing money than paying interest on those bonds and taxing
people to cover that interest when we could just create as much money as the government needs, um,
and, and print it or create it electronically and just run the government that way.
The answer is that we actually already do that. That's what we're pretending that we don't do that.
Cause what, what we do now is the government borrows a bunch of money, um, and then uses that to fund
its wars and its, um, cradle to grave entitlement systems, et cetera, et cetera. Um, and then it
creates money via the federal reserve in order to buy those bonds and cover the interest on those bonds.
So yeah, we could skip the, uh, the whole two big steps of borrowing and taxing and just create the
money that we're creating and have exactly the same world that we have now, but the governments
of the world don't want voters to know that we're just financing the government for money we create
out of thin air. Um, because you know, the, the fatal flaw in that is the sentence, the government
will create as much money as it needs, right? Because it gets to define how much it needs and its needs
are infinite once it starts really thinking about it. So if we went to just monitor monetary theory,
we just got rid of, uh, taxes and got rid of debt. Um, our act after tax income would be higher
and we would be happy for about three years until it dawned on everybody that the government was, is
now creating twice as much money as it used to create because there, you know, there's no political
price for it so far to create insane amounts of money. It's handing money out to everybody in sight.
It's, you know, we've invaded three new countries in the past year, uh, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
And the dollar begins to plunge in value as everybody sees this. And then it dies. There's a
concept called the crack up boom in a, in a school of thought called the Austrian school of economics.
And it, it says that with, um, with an unsound currency, which is what we have today, you eventually
reach a point where a critical mass of people figure out that it's explicit government policy
to make the currency worth less a little bit at a time year after year in order to make the debt
manageable. And those people react to that the way you would think they get rid of that currency. As
soon as they get some, you know, they get paid and they turn their, their paycheck into real stuff
like farmland and gold and silver and, you know, that, et cetera. And, um, that causes those things
to spike in price, which is to say it causes the dollar to collapse in value and the system dies,
you know, and we are very close to that right now. We're just a few, basically lines of semantics
away from people figuring that out, you know, uh, just a couple more betrayals on the part of the
aristocracy of a couple more groups of people and we're there. So I think that's the coming decade
or the financial world. And by implication, the political world and the geopolitical world,
we've got chaos coming and it's because we screwed up our currency on such a vast scale
that people are just going to give up on it in the not too distant future.
So, so, so what you're saying is really a very, very, uh, real thing that we, you know,
there is no value to keeping the dollar today, uh, that you basically are better off buying a car,
even if the car depreciates a little bit, because you are eventually not, you don't, you have very
little trust that, you know, that, that, that, that this currency will, uh, will, will hold its
value at all. That, you know, basically if you keep your money in the bank today, the declared
inflation is that you may lose say 5% or whatever, but the reality is that because of all of the money
that's being printed on top of that, that might not be measured yet, but that's
coming back to you. You may be losing more. And I have to ask you a question from someone who
hasn't lived in the U S you know, from a, from a, you know, an outside the U S point of view,
it becomes really, really clear that for a very long time, we paid for the U S lifestyle, right?
We, we were basically, the U S was basically, you know, having a free dinner on, you know, at the
expense of all of us. Uh, and, and I think that's again, something that most people don't understand
that by, by the U S printing money, uh, forcing every country in the world to use the dollars to
trade things like oil and so on. Basically countries around the world would have to take that money that
the U S uh, printed, keep that as a reserve because it's the only way they can buy the commodities that
they need. And as a result, all of that new additional, uh, uh, you know, uh, dilution of
the currency is actually born on the Chinese side or on the, you know, on, on the, um, you know,
Middle Eastern side or whatever. Can you talk to a little bit about that?
Yeah. The, the dollar is the world's reserve currency. And that is what has allowed the U S to
get away with what we've gotten away with, because everybody in the world needs dollars. That's where you,
that's your, um, risk-free assets. So if you have some extra money, you know, you can put it in local
currency, but you don't necessarily trust your local government. Um, but you put it in dollars
and you know, that's gonna, the value will still be there going forward. At least that's how it's
been perceived in the past, but that is starting to go away. Cause, uh, you know, as you said,
we have been able to get away with a lot of things because other people have been willing to take
dollars and that has allowed us to behave in ways that we wouldn't be able to behave otherwise.
You know, you can, you can, you can say it's mathematically correct that we borrow our
military budget from China. Yeah. And, uh, that's such an interesting state. It's true.
It is true that way. It's such an interesting statement.
Yeah. And you know, from China's point of view, that's, that's less and less of a good deal,
right? Correct. And, and by the way, you import, you, you also import all the microchips that you
need in your weapons from Taiwan. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Interesting. Which, you know,
that, that could be the start of world war three at some point here, uh, which we, we figure out,
you know, that, uh, that that's our flashpoint, but, um, what's happening around the world now is that
other countries are starting to figure this out. So it used to be that, um, if you ran a trade surplus
with us, in other words, you gave us real stuff and we gave you dollars that you would take those
dollars, you would buy treasury bonds, which are government debt. So in effect, you would lend that
money back to the U S government and you would hold those treasury bonds in your central bank,
foreign exchange reserves, which you use to back your currency. Well, that's suddenly not such a
good deal for a lot of countries for two reasons. One is that we're, we're clearly making the dollar
less valuable year after year. So it, it's not necessarily a store of value anymore to hold treasury
bonds. And the other is that holding treasury bonds has become kind of a political statement
because the U S is using the dollar as a weapon. Anybody that steps out of line, um, from, from
what the U S empire tells them to do, um, gets, um, punished financially in some way. We'll kick your
banks out of the swift international bank settlement system, or we'll put sanctions on your exporting
industries and not let them sell their oil or uranium or whatever. Um, and a lot of countries who
who would like to, if not become world powers, but at least have some autonomy in their own
neighborhood find that very frustrating. So what's happening now is central banks around the world
are selling their treasury bonds and buying gold because gold is a neutral asset. It's the old kind
of money that, uh, that we all used to have. And it's, it's not by buying gold. You're not necessarily
making a statement that you're on one side or another in the, uh, the coming global, um,
geopolitical crisis between the U S Russia and China, you know, so you can back your currency
with something that will probably do much better than dollars going forward. And you don't have to
choose a side in the coming world war three, you know? So a lot of countries are doing that. They're
buying gold, um, and they're selling treasury bonds. And so that sounds an awful lot like the crack up boom
that I described before, you know, when they get money, they dump their dollars and they buy something
that is real. That's going to hold its value better than currencies do. So what happens to those dollars?
Well, that's the, uh, that's very interesting question because they, they, in a lot, a lot of
cases come back to the U S uh, if somebody dumps treasury bonds, somebody else is buying those treasury
bonds for dollars. Um, and then maybe they get sent back to the U S in exchange for real U S assets.
Yeah. In other words, the money, let's say there's 10 trillion U S dollars sloshing around in the world
now. And if that comes back to the U S even 5 trillion dollars of it into real stuff, you know,
into, um, um, Miami condos or Kansas farmland or oil wells in Texas or whatever that pushes the price
of all those things up, which is to say it pushes the value of the dollar down. So that's the big
short-term risk for this trend out of treasury bonds and into gold is that it makes the dollar
weaker, other things being equal. And it brings us closer to the point where we perceive that the
dollar is no longer a store of value and we just shouldn't be in it. And there's an organization
called the BRICS countries that is kind of leading the way here. BRICS stands for Brazil, Russia, India,
China, and South Africa. And they're forming a separate monetary union that doesn't require the
dollar just totally bypasses the dollar for a lot of kinds of trade and is, uh, is threatening to set up
a, uh, gold backed currency that those countries will use for trade among themselves. That'll be,
you know, backed by gold. Therefore it will be a sound currency that will hold its value.
And, uh, it'll allow them to continue to dump their dollars on the open market. So that's, uh,
you know, it's a long-term risk to the U S but it is a very real risk because the BRICS countries,
they own a lot of natural resources. They're powerful countries.
Yeah. I mean, in, in, in a very interesting way, the real risk was that, you know, before the Ukraine,
Russia war, uh, the, the, you know, if you wanted to buy oil and gas, even from Russia, you would have
to pay in dollars. And so there was a value to the dollar. Now, I think 92% of all the trade
between Russia and China is now done in their local currencies, which basically removes all of
the, uh, you know, the need for the U S dollar there. And I think the idea that you're describing
of the dollar coming back is actually really interesting for people to understand. So, so the
way I normally try to, to explain it is imagine if you walked into a supermarket and there were
two bottles of Coke left and you know, each of them is a dollar and someone walked in, uh, very
thirsty, uh, had $2 ready to buy them. When someone else walked in with $3, very thirsty, ready to buy
them. The price of the boat, two bottles have just immediately come up to three. It's as simple as that
because he has the money, he has the need and, you know, and basically he will take the price
up. And I think when you mentioned that, if you think of the entire U S economy and everything
that's available for sale, let's say is a thousand dollars worth. There is a thousand dollars in the
U S competing for it. It remains at a thousand dollars, but if there is, you know, half of $500
coming back from outside to the U S economy, now there is a thousand 500 chasing everything that was
originally worth a thousand, then everything would go up by 50%. Eventually those dollars have to be
allocated. And I, I think that's actually very much what happened during the COVID time where people
were just given money, you know, in, in government, uh, support if you want. And, and basically that money
had to find a place to land in, you know, whether that's real estate eventually, whether that's stocks
eventually, and that basically kept things going higher. Yes, exactly. Right now those dollars
aren't here. They're not here trying to buy a lot of U S stuff, but if they come back here,
it increases the money supply in the U S, which, like you said, more dollars chasing the same number
of things and that'll push the prices up. So yeah, that's, uh, and, and that's very probably a process
that's, um, that's in train right now and, uh, and we'll continue. And, you know, the COVID thing
is also really important because most adults in the U S had never experienced real inflation before,
you know, two or 3% inflation a year is beneath notice. Um, because there was inflation, but it
was flowing into financial assets like houses and stocks, which aren't considered inflation in the U S
that's considered to be a good thing instead of a bad thing. But, uh, in 2022, all that money we created
to, uh, to manage the pandemic lockdowns, uh, flowed into everything. It flowed into food and it flowed
into rent. And, uh, all of a sudden regular people got to experience double digit inflation. They saw their
living standard rise by about 30% in a lot of cases, or I'm sorry, their, uh, their cost of living
rise by 30% in the space of just three or four years. So now we're a very different population
in the U S and in a lot of other places in the sense that we know inflation is a real thing.
You know, we know it's possible. We understand how it works. And, uh, we, we are terrified that
we're going to have to go back to hoarding toilet paper from Costco and stuff like that, uh, and not
being able to buy a used car that we need to get to work because there are no used cars on the lots
for less than $25,000. Um, that that's scared a lot of people. So it kind of primed them for the
other discoveries that they're going to make now as, as we figure out on every level that our
government can't be trusted. And the biggest part of the government that can't be trusted is the
financial system. Um, so what do we do and says, you know, I have a sub stack newsletter where, um,
the, the goal is to find actionable ideas for how to deal with this when it starts to happen, because,
you know, it looks inevitable, uh, barring world war three or some, or aliens landing or something
like that. The financial crisis is going to flow from our past mistakes is pretty easy to, uh,
to lay out in terms of this happens, then this happens and this happens. So the question is how
do you protect yourself and your family from something like that? Um, that you've, you know,
you've never had to think about before. These are new ideas. How do you prep and, uh, and what should
you do? What skills should you acquire? What investments should you have? Um, so it's,
it's suddenly interesting to a lot of people because they now accept that, um, a crisis of that
form is possible, you know, cause they experienced something like that in 2022.
So, so, so I, I, I definitely want to come to the question of, so what do we do about that?
But I have one more question before we go there. You know, it's, it's sad for me to say this because I
have tons of American friends and I, you know, did business in America for so long, but it's
clear in my mind that what's happening is, as you rightly said, the rich, uh, society is unaffected
by this even benefiting a little bit. And if that society collapses, they have global mobility. They
don't really have an issue to stick to the U S other than maybe to diversify their assets outside
the U S and their currency outside the U S dollar. But the, the, the, the typical American citizen
today is really, really, really struggling. Right. Uh, it, you know, in my, in my mind,
I think the way BRICS is moving in, especially after the U S aggravates the entire world by,
you know, putting sanctions on Russian money, uh, that basically gets everyone to distrust the idea
that I can keep my money in U S related assets and, and that it's still my money, uh, you know,
makes everyone move away from those assets. As a matter of fact, not just governments, but you know,
a person like me, for example, what now city bank blocks my account every two and a half weeks,
because some regulation of some sort is saying, ask him for more KYC, ask him for more KYC,
which is in, in a way really, really understandable in a, you know, in a society where we need to keep
financial systems safe. But the question of blocking my money makes it not my money makes them,
it makes it the bank's money, unless I comply to what the bank wants. And I think the whole world
is waking up to this, that the big bully is not safe to be around anymore. And so I can easily see
that the, you know, the U S citizen is going to suffer from that, that the, you know, BRICS will
continue, that the U S dollar will continue to the, to, to devalue that, you know, debt will be a very
easy way for the U S government to try and pay some of the interest by paying, by printing a trillion
dollars more every year to pay the interest and so on. But my question is, how does that
ricochet back to the world? So what happens to other societies that used to depend on the U S economy
or to trade with the U S economy when, when that starts to happen in the U S?
Well, yeah, they, they have the problem that American citizens have, but writ large. In other words,
what does India do or, or China or Taiwan? Like you said, what do they do when, when they see that the
financial system they've depended on for all these decades is no longer going to function the way
that they're used to it functioning. And so they, in a very real sense, they have to prep in the same
way that an individual American has to prep against, um, the, um, the dollar crisis. That's kind of
inevitable now. And, uh, one of the things that they're already doing is buying a lot of gold.
Central banks are aggressive buyers of gold right now, much more so than any time in the past.
Um, India, um, so far this year, their silver imports are eight times higher than in 2023.
So they're, they're doing that one thing. They're, they're bringing in a lot of precious metals that
whatever they do with them, they will tend to hold their value and there'll be a source of wealth.
Well, China is encouraging its citizens to buy gold. Um, in, I think it's Korea. You, you, you can buy gold
in vending machines in convenience stores. Um, so a lot of the world is already doing that particular
thing. And then, uh, weaning themselves off dollars or trade is another thing. That's pretty obvious.
You know, if you're, uh, if you're trading, if you're selling oil to China, then you take you one
instead of demanding dollars via an intermediate step. Now, uh, of course that's, that's not ideal,
which is why there might be a gold back currency at some point that the BRICS countries use. So
they don't have to trust the currencies of the dictatorships or who are the, uh, the main members
of the, the BRICS coalition. But, um, yeah, you know, if you're in another country, weaning yourself
off the need for dollars is a, is a very quick, very simple way to protect yourself partially from
what's coming. And, uh, and, you know, you see it happening all around the world. So, and, and here's,
what's interesting though, or one of the interesting things is that that doesn't mean us assets
will fall in value. So it's possible that weaning yourself off the dollar might involve buying us
assets because if the dollar, yeah. Cause they will go up in dollar terms and that protects you
against a devaluation of the dollar. So, you know, if, if, if you buy a, um, a San Francisco condo or
something like that, if you're in Japan or China, um, it's an understandable asset that you own,
you know, it's not, it's not, uh, anything that you really have to go out of your way to figure
out, you know, how that works. So you just buy it, you leave it empty. And then, you know,
the 10 years from now, you're going to come back to it and it's going to have some value,
you know, it won't just evaporate. It may go down in real terms and dollar terms, but, um,
it, it's still going to be a valuable asset with utility. And the U S is the least likely country
to be invaded and, uh, and, you know, blow up your condo. That's least likely to happen in the U S
than, than anywhere else. So, um, so it makes sense. So in a weird kind of way, what's happening
with the dollar actually attracts capital from the rest of the world. But isn't, isn't it, isn't it
possible that, you know, because there are no more buyers, because the economy is struggling in the U S
that the price of that condo will go down. Yeah. Well, real estate is a cyclical asset
and, um, it used to be that it would just stop going up during recessions, but in, in the last
recession in 2008, 2009 house prices tanked in the United States and today's house prices are much
higher than they were back during that bubble, that real estate bubble. So yeah, I, I think home
prices in the U S are due to fall, but I think that what comes after what will probably be a
deflationary recession of the next year or two, just because, you know, you know, we've taken on so
much bad debt that we have to have a recession because consumers are out of money. Everything's
too expensive. Consumer spending all go down. The economy will slow down. We'll have a recession.
We'll have an equities bear market. All of that will happen and it'll take real estate down with it.
Um, but coming out of that, the fed will try to inflate its way out of the recession. And then
we get even more inflation. And in that case, yeah, you know, a house or a condo in a, a border
city or a coastal city in the U S may not keep up with the depreciation, depreciation of the dollar,
but it will hold some of its value. It will remain an asset with some value. And for a lot of people,
you know, if you're trying to get your money out of Russia right now or Brazil or someplace like that,
protecting some of your money is better than losing all of your money.
Correct. Yeah.
So in that sense, you, and that's basically what's been driving up the price of a lot of U S assets
all along and Canadian assets, by the way, uh, is people around the world who are willing to take
a 30% loss in real purchasing power in order to protect the other 70%. And they're buying real estate and,
and, uh, uh, or condos and oil wells and things like that. And that to them is a good deal,
you know, because they made so much money with whatever kind of corruption they were engaging
in, in their home country, that 70% of that they'll take it.
Yeah. So, so, so when you, when you give advice, you normally say precious metals assets,
you know, are better than currency in the coming time. Right. Um, but, but that assumes that someone
already has money. Uh, you know, there are so many people around the world and many listening to us right now,
who are barely making ends meet. So what advice would you have in, in the coming economy for
someone who's not made it yet? Who's not part of the, of the baby boomer society that's, you know,
has the money and now is worried about not losing it.
Yeah. You know, there are 50% of the U S population is in the boat that you just described there,
where they don't, they don't have any real savings. Um, so they're not going to go out and just
buy a hundred thousand dollars worth of gold or silver. That's, that's completely beyond them.
Um, there are other things they can do though, because you, you basically,
you know, look at how your grandparents lived and then, uh, and look at how resilient they probably
were. Cause they had a garden that maybe provided 20 or 30% of their food. They knew
some of the other farmers that they got milk and eggs and beef from. And, and so they, they had a network
of people who were at their, you know, who would watch their back. And then they watched
those people's backs. In other words, they were parts of communities that we've kind of gotten
away from that. Now life has been so good in the U S that, um, we've taken on the idea that we, we can
basically manage on our own. We can move to a new place. I, I, um, I live in a place with a lot of
retirees, for instance, and a lot of them moved from their, their homes to buy a nice house in this
area. Um, without necessarily knowing anybody, they, they were just, you know, they had money.
Um, they wanted to be in a pretty place and they, they moved here, but, um, you know, let a gigantic
financial crisis happen two years from now, and they aren't not going to have the kind of network
that you need. So I, I think step number one is wherever you are, wherever you're starting from,
try to become more of a part of the community than you are now. Step number two, look at the
things that you could provide for yourself that you now buy at exorbitant prices. Food is one repair
services is another, you know, if you can kind of sort of become a handyman, um, you're not only
more self-sufficient, but you're in demand in your neighborhood, you know, all of a sudden you've got a
part-time job there. If you can, you know, rewire a socket or, uh, if you can fix a car so it doesn't
have to be into the dealer, you know, any number of things that, that our grandparents used to be
able to do just because duh, it's what you know how to do, you know, we've gotten away from that.
And there's TV show called, um, it's a cartoon about a small town in Colorado. And, um, in that small
town, the, uh, the people with college degrees and nice houses and everything didn't know how to fix
their stuff. So they were always calling the handyman and there weren't enough handymen in
town to handle all the business. So prices of handyman type jobs started going up until they
became the economic elite of that town. They became the rich guys, the handyman did. And that's an extreme
example of what's coming, but we are coming to a point where being able to work with your hands and
fix real things is a very in-demand profession. So, you know, learn how to fix things yourself.
Back to basics.
Yeah. Advise your kids who are thinking about maybe getting a psych degree or a history degree
or something like that. Advise them to, um, to, uh, to go into elect, you know, become an electrician
or a plumber or something like that, because those are the things that, um, that will hold their value
going forward in terms of skill sets and careers. So they, they call something, there's a thing called
skill, skill, skill stacking in, um, employment advising. And that's a thing where you, you know,
you take what you can do right now and you add some skill to that. If you're a computer programmer,
learn to learn public speaking. Um, if you're pretty much anything, learn some basic electrical,
electrical stuff or plumbing or whatever. Uh, and that makes you more self-sufficient and better able to
manage when things get tricky. I, I, yeah, I think that's amazing actually, you know, when I started
to really look at the, at the way the economy is going, I searched YouTube quite a bit for advice
on how to survive the great depression. Right. And, and, you know, it's, it's, it's quite puzzling for me
that the, you know, the actual things that people did back that at that time were very much in line
with, with what you're saying here, you know, the, the, the way people, you know, survive the worst
economic time in our modern history was they become, became closer to the community. They
went back to basics, saved a little going into it, whoever saved a little going into it, hopefully
turned it into something that they didn't appreciate, uh, you know, did it fared out better. And, and
basically everyone went back to basics. It's like, I, I'll, I'll fix your car, but cook, you know, my kids
a meal or whatever. And, and I think it's quite interesting. Hopefully you will not get to a point
where it's that dramatic or drastic, but definitely, definitely. I think we need to wake up from the
current lifestyle where, you know, if everything is disposable, you know, every, or every, you know,
thing that you want to talk to buy or shop is one click away. You don't really think about that.
Every one of those dollars, every one of those habits, every one of those skills will matter,
I think very much in the next few years. Yes, absolutely. Uh, the cartoon I was thinking of
was South Park. That's the TV show about the handyman. Yeah. I can't believe I couldn't remember
South Park, but, uh, but yeah, you know, if you look at our grandparents' lifestyle, um, that's a
much more appropriate lifestyle for today than it has been for the past 50 years, because things have
been so easy, you know, growing up in the 1980s and 1990s was probably literally the best time in human
history to grow up. In the US. In the US. Yeah. Because there were jobs, um, that paid pretty well.
Real estate was pretty cheap. Uh, most investments hadn't started their multi-decade bull runs yet.
Um, and, um, so everything was relatively easy and we got the idea that that's how it would always be,
and that we didn't have to do any of these kind of grubby, messy things. We just pay somebody to take
care of it all. In other words, we became kind of little mini aristocrats in our own way. You know,
we have servants to handle this. It wasn't a live-in servant, but you know, the, the car mechanic fixed
the car for us. Maybe a maid comes in once a week and cleans the house and a handyman rewires whatever
needs rewiring or does some drywall for us or whatever. So we had basically, um, kind of Uber version
of servants, you know, you call them up and they come over and they take care of stuff. Um, and we
paid them what in today's terms is pretty good money to do that. And so we probably have to go
back to the days when we take care of most of what we take care of. And, and also another thing we did
was we kind of fragmented as families where back in our grandparents' day, maybe two generations or
even three generations lived in the same house, which is incredibly, um, economical when you think about
it, you know, sharing one piece of real estate among eight people instead of two people. Um,
and I think we're going to have to go back to that again, in part because, um, baby boomers now, a lot
of them were kind of stuck in their McMansions because they've got 4,000 square foot three-story
houses that, uh, and, and they've got sore knees and sore hips, so they can't really get up and down,
but they've got a 3% mortgage on a house like that, which is super cheap. And what, you know, where else
are they going to, and anyhow, they, um, they aren't selling their houses the way demographically
it usually plays out. Usually by the time a generation hits an average of 70 years old,
they start dumping their houses on the market and that crashes real estate prices. But, um,
that's not happening. Yeah. And one way that could play out is that the kids and the grandkids,
instead of grandma and grandpa moving out, the kids and the grandkids move back in with them. Yeah.
And, uh, you know, that's, that's one way of solving the, uh, I can't buy a house problem or
millennials and Gen Zers. Uh, and, and I think that's something that we're going to see on a
vast scale. And it's not because we just wake up and think, oh, let's, let's get us all into one
house. I really want to live that way. We'll think, we'll think of that because all of a sudden we can't
afford, afford our current lifestyles and, you know, you'll lose your job or whatever, or your stock
portfolio will tank or lots of things will happen to, um, to, uh, make you much less risk rich than
you think you are. Oh, pensions. We haven't talked about pensions yet. You know, public sector pensions
are everywhere. And, uh, in the U S and people think that they're going to make X amount of money
from their public sector pension, but they're not, those pensions are going to go bust and that's
going to lead a lot of people to, uh, to think, all right, well, let's get a couple generations
together in this house and see if we can survive that way. So that's another thing that's coming.
And, you know, prepping, uh, someone who's prepping for a crisis might want to get in front of that
by thinking about it now. How, how bad do you think it will get John? I mean, I, I have,
I have to say it's slow-mo. My podcast has always been, you know, the, the, the point where you come
for reflection and for, you know, thinking about things that would improve your mental health and,
and make you feel better about life. I'm, I'm choosing to do this mini series that,
you know, it's not what they told you because I think it's time for people to really become aware
and prepare for what is about to happen. But how bad is it? Like how, how deep will we get into
recession? You think how long will it, would it take us? Is this 1929 again, or is it 2008?
It's definitely worse than 2008 because the numbers are so much bigger.
We got ourselves out of the great recession in that decade by borrowing insane amounts of new
money on top of the insane amounts of money that we borrowed before. So because the numbers are much
bigger, the consequences have to be much bigger, but, uh, the specifics are, are tough because we,
we kind of had a choice. We're at a crossroads right now where we have two crises, two different
kinds of crises, and we can't avoid any crisis, but we have to basically choose now which of these big
crises we're going to have. And one, like you said, could be the 1930s. That's where we basically keep
money creation under control. We allow interest rates to go up and that bankrupts a lot of people
and causes a lot of the bad debt to blow up. And so we have a deflationary depression
in which the debt is wiped out by default. In other words, lots of people go bankrupt.
Their debt ceases to exist. They're impoverished. Their families are impoverished. And we have this
brutal decade in which, uh, 90% of the population, uh, feels as poor as they've ever felt and as
hopeless as they've ever felt. So we have that, or we try to inflate our way out of this, which is
what a lot of economists seem to want to do now, where we just create as much new money as it takes
to make today's debt less onerous. In other words, if, if the value of the dollar goes down,
the dollars that you have to pay to cover that debt are less expensive. And it's a cheaper,
a cheaper process for you to get out from under the debt. That will be a catastrophe. That'll be
something like, uh, Weimar Germany in 1924, when currency just became worthless, you know, where
you, where you take a suitcase full of it to the grocery store, you burn it to heat your house or
something. Um, and I think that's what we want to do. That's, or not what we want to do, but those are
the choices that our governments are making. Um, because, because you, as you mentioned right at the
beginning of this talk, that's the easy way out. You know, it's, it's easy for a politician who's
going to retire in two years to generate a little extra inflation right now, then retire and leave
the consequences, the much more serious consequences to their successors. So that's what we're doing
right now. So I think, I think we have a currency crisis. In other words, we have a time when the
dollar loses so much of its value that it ceases to function in the way that a form of money has to
function to be valid. And now that could lead to two things. One is, you know, that hyperinflation that
I mentioned, the Weimar Germany scenario in which everybody who trusts the government is impoverished
because their, their life savings just disappears, or we could have a monetary reset, which is we just
get rid of the old system and impose a new one. Like on some Sunday night, the government just
announces that from now on the dollar is just a, it's a name for one 10,000th of an ounce of gold.
And, uh, it, it will be henceforth convertible to gold and a government office anytime you want to.
And the money supply is going to be limited to the increase in the amount of gold that the U S government
has, which is to say that the money supply is going to be basically fixed. So no more inflation going
forward, sound money. Uh, it's a, it's a system that works in the future, but at a cost of, again,
impoverishing everybody who trusts the government. If you get a bank account in dollars and they make
the dollar worth one eighth of what it is today in real terms, in purchasing power terms, then you
became a lot less rich than you thought you were, or you became dirt poor. And so we'd have to get
through the political unrest that comes from that because there's no way to do this painlessly.
And, uh, you know, I think a lot of people are going to be enraged by that. And so we, you know,
we have to, uh, somehow, some way get through the, the two years of incredible political unrest without
some kind of a violent revolution for that to work. But if we can make it work, that's the least painful
way of getting out from under this, you know, there is no pain-free way, but that way would be one that,
that gives us a viable monetary system going forward.
It's quite, it's quite interesting what you just said, because I, you know, so, so I've seen this
in my lifetime in many, many countries, you know, Argentina and Turkey, now in my home country, Egypt,
where basically the currency is just completely, you know, devalued in, in a way that, you know,
when the young Turkish lira, the new Turkish lira comes out, you know, it, it disrupts the economy,
but then it really stabilizes the economy. I think the challenge with that is that now the Turkish
lira is depreciating again so fast because the habits that created the original depreciation
have not changed, right? And I think in a very interesting way, as you, as you go at the core of
it, perhaps the biggest reform is for the US government to stop borrowing, to, to actually
stop having a budget deficit, to stop investing in the war machine that's killing everyone around
the world, you know, big bully, basically, uh, financing, uh, it from the money. I mean,
that the statement you said is just incredible financing the war machine from the money made
by chip paid by China. Right. And, and it's quite interesting because eventually the US,
you know, if Trump gets elected, we'll go like, okay, and now we're going to have a war with China.
No, you're not, you know, you don't have the capabilities to do it if you, if you go that way.
And I think it's interesting that perhaps without fixing the underlying issue of that constant supply
of money that is not backed with anything, you know, you're really not never going to get out of
that hole, basically. Yeah. Well, see, that's, that's one of the big issues in a monetary reset
is it means that henceforth, you know, going forward, you have to live within your means.
Yeah. And in the US, that would mean that, uh, the average lifestyle gets cut by a third or more,
you know, we would really have to scale back. And all the pensioners,
all the pensioners completely. Oh, totally. All the pensioners would see a big cut in their
pensions, you know, social security, Medicare, as well as teachers union pensions and things like
that. Um, and, and we'd have to cut the military budget in half. So entitlements would have to be
cut dramatically. The military empire would basically have to be scrapped. We'd have to, what do we have
now? 180 military bases around the world, or I think it's four or 500, depending on whether it's
just a presence or an actual base, but, uh, we'd have to call the soldiers home, you know,
and we'd have to let Asia manage Asia and Europe manage Europe. And, and we would just have to pull
back and be North America. And, uh, see, we have people in charge of the US government for whom that
is a fate worth worse than death, literally, because they see themselves as running a global empire
that's going to endure for a thousand years. They're called neocons in the US, neoconservatives.
And they believe that the US with 5% of the world's population should rule the other 95% of
the people in the world in perpetuity, you know, that that's just our birthright. And that whatever
wars we have to fight now in order to make that happen are totally worth it, you know, because the
long-term goal is so amazing. Um, so, you know, got to deal with those guys somehow because they would
not put up with a, um, elimination of the US global military empire, but financially there's
no way that it survives because we can't pay for it anymore without basically zeroing out social
security, Medicare, and all other pensions. That would be the mathematical equation that would get
us to, um, you know, maintaining the global empire. And I don't think that's politically possible,
obviously. So which, which candidate do you think can be elected with a campaign that says,
I'm going to make you really suffer, right? It's, it's, you know, and which candidate gets elected
and then actually does any of what they say that they were going to do. And at the end of the day,
the rich are dictating the agenda. Oh, absolutely. Yeah. The donor class runs the country in the US.
And, um, the only time this will happen, you know, any kind of a resolution, uh, like a monetary
reset will happen when it's the least bad option on a list of extremely bad options. So in other words,
if the, if the peasants are metaphorically outside the gates of the castle and there's a million of
them and, uh, and they're thinking, uh, French revolution or, uh, Mussolini or something like
that, you know, they're, they're thinking things that, uh, would be much worse for you than to give
up the power to create money out of thin air. That's when you'll do it, but not till then. I mean,
who in their right mind would give up the power to create money out of thin air until their life
depends on it. Can I, can I suggest another alternative, which, you know, I, I have to say
it pains my heart to say it, but it seems to me that everyone's abandoned in the US other than the
few, uh, you know, glorified slaves that the US had for quite a bit in the West, right? It seems to me
that BRICS is making a very, very powerful, very clear statement that your issues are going to be
exported back to you that we were, I mean, I don't know if the numbers are correct, but I think that
30% of the treasury, uh, you know, purchases of China has moved out in the last year into gold.
So basically there is a very gradual and, you know, um, unstoppable move away from supporting the
US policy, supporting the US dollar standard, you know, uh, and, and basically creating a global
economy in the global South that doesn't include the US. And, and, and, you know, honestly, it's,
if the US has constantly for the last 50 years been on a trade surplus that basically is funded by the
rest of the world, eventually sort of the world will go like, yeah, you know, it's your problem now,
deal with it. And, and in a, in a very unusual way, it might seem to me that that might mean
that the rest of the global economy, there is, you know, almost the inverse of the picture that
we've seen for the last 50 years where the US living standards are constantly going up. Everyone
else in the world is becoming poorer other than perhaps China and, and, and a few other players.
And, and, you know, and, and, and that picture reverses where everyone starts to catch up by trading
among themselves while the US really starts to pay back for the consequences of 50 years of,
of, uh, of wrong policies. Yeah, that's, that's a, um, a real process that's kind of in place right
now, because a lot of what's happening with the BRICS countries is they're doing things that the US
objects to, and they're just saying, well, you know, what are you going to do about it? Because look
at Ukraine, we started this proxy war in Ukraine to try to weaken Russia. And Russia is now running
a, a nice trade surplus by selling oil to the BRICS countries. And, and see, that would normally be
something that would almost be an act of war from the point of view of the US. But are we going to
declare war on China and India at the same time? That's, that's a bridge too far, even for our new
kinds, I think. Um, and so it's, it's possible that US living standards fall, um, as the rest of the
world just kind of, um, ignores it. I mean, I, I think that's a ways away because the US financial
markets are irreplaceable at the moment and the dollar remains an important currency for trade
and everything. So, so we're talking longer term, we're not talking at the next BRICS meeting, you know,
this all happens. No, no, we're talking 10, 15 years. Yeah. But it is a trend in that direction.
And I think it's possible that new leaders come into the, um, into office in the US and just do
their best to make up with the rest of the world. That would be such a nice thing to say. I mean,
honestly, with an external view of the, of, you know, of the US out of the US, John, it's so interesting
to us. Like literally a US president could pick up the, the, the phone and talk to Putin and say,
all right, all right. NATO is not going to expand into Ukraine anymore. And the war would be over.
Right. And, and it's mind boggling for us how, but I think you said it really well that the war
machine is a very big economic incentive. And so a lot of people are very interested to keep wars going
to ship, you know, billions of dollars over because it's a business. Yeah. Um, it, it very,
in a very real sense, it is a business. It's how politics politicians get reelected. It's how the
CEOs of general dynamic and Raytheon retire incredibly rich. Um, and they see no reason
to stop because they've either convinced themselves that it's the right thing to do,
you know, to continue, um, trying to pacify the world, or, um, they just understand that this is how
they make money. This is their job. So, uh, so yeah, I, I think that, um, especially in terms of
resources, some resources, um, the U S has a big problem going forward because we aren't, we don't
have a monopoly on a lot of things that we need. So, you know, to the extent that the BRICS countries do
have a monopoly on some of those things, that's a big issue for the U S. But now the optimistic
scenario for the U S is that we've got an awful lot of geographic advantages, you know, two big
oceans on either side of us and all the farmland in the world you could want in the U S and Canada,
uh, a young, hardworking workforce in Mexico. Yeah. So if the U S had to stand alone, uh, or North
America had to stand alone, we'd be fine. You know, we would definitely be okay. And yeah. And I think
that might be the best way for this to play out. If the rest of the world said, listen, just go back
there and leave us alone. Yeah. And we, we would end up getting richer that way. Cause if we didn't
have to finance a trillion dollar a year, a military empire, um, then our debt would be less onerous.
The currency would be stronger. We'd be massively energy exporting, you know, at least independent
and maybe exporting on a mass scale. And, you know, we would be okay. So we, we have a much more
attractive scenario in our hand, you know, it's just right there, just a little bit of
a different political leadership. We could say, listen, um, we took on too much debt over the
past 30 years. We, we can't afford to have an empire. So we're just going to pull back.
You guys handle you and we'll handle us. And we're going to be, uh, we're going to drill baby
drill here. We're going to have, um, energy exports that we're going to use to pay off our debts.
And we're going to be the agricultural powerhouse of the world. And, and, uh, we're going to sell
you cheap wheat as much as you want. We could do all that very easily. That we're not means there,
you know, that we're not doing, it means there's some serious pathology at the top of the
aristocrats, such an optimistic scenario. Honestly, this is a wonderful scenario. I mean,
a very interesting way. I think a big, a big chunk of the problem is financing the U S lifestyle,
whether it's the politicians lifestyle or it's the military establishments lifestyle,
or even the, just the typical consumers lifestyle. And it's, it's mind boggling when you,
when you go to the U S and compare to the rest of the world, I, you know, when I, when I worked in
California, uh, with Google X, I, uh, you know, I dated in a wonderful lady in California. And one
day we were having a conversation and I don't know, spoke about finances somehow. And she said,
and I quote, she said, you have no idea how poor I am Mo. Uh, she said that as she unlocked her SUV
and put her iPhone on the dashboard. And I'm, and I'm like, you have no idea what poor is like
really in all honesty. And, and by the way, she didn't, she wasn't exaggerating for the lifestyle
of California. Right. That was poor. That was considered poor. And, and you have to imagine that
some, somewhere in the process of the next five, 10 years, some of that will have to end somehow,
you know, a trillion dollars or a $2 trillion military budget would have to end somehow.
One of the real tragedies of today's America is that, uh, we don't get very much for all the
money we're borrowing and for all the risks we take on around the world. We're, we're not healthy.
We are an extremely unhealthy culture. And part of that is the whole, you know, the, the aristocrats
who are in charge of the food and pharmaceutical system have made it that way. You know, they designed us
to be fat, lazy, and stupid. Um, and, uh, so yeah, let's, let's say in, in the U S you have a job that
pays you $60,000 a year. You've got a car, you've got a small house, um, and, um, you're safe. You
know, you, uh, you don't have to worry about any kind of a rebel force coming over the border or anything
like that. Um, but you, you probably are on, um, three different kinds of pharmaceuticals, two of
which are antidepressants. You've got, uh, all kinds of, um, incipient, um, illnesses like, um,
like heart disease and arthritis and things like that, that you wouldn't have if you were living
a healthy lifestyle. Um, and you're gonna, you're gonna die early and very expensively.
And so we're really not getting that much for our wealth. And that's why, you know, that we have a
politician, uh, Robert Kennedy Jr. Here, who's running or was running for president and his catchphrase now
is make America healthy again. And I think that that resonates with a lot of people, or at least it
should, cause, uh, cause if we were a healthier society, we would be a lot easier to get along
with. I think for the rest of the world, we'd be a lot less stupid than we are now.
I would agree. I can talk to you for hours and I actually do. I mean, in, in, in many ways, I follow
every part of content that you put out on the sub stack out on the, uh, on, on YouTube on, you know,
I love what your, I love your brutal honesty. I just will have to say that. And I think your advice
is incredibly valuable. I think people need to be awakened to the, to the, you know, to what's,
to the reality of what's happening and, and what we can do to, uh, to take care of ourselves and
others. I'm really, really grateful, John. Thank you so much for being here today.
Thanks. I really appreciate that. And, and, you know, let me say one, one of the good things about
it taking so long to play out all this financial stuff is that it's led a lot of very smart people
develop a voice in the world. I agree. Uh, and, and so you're one of them and, um,
I'm really glad you've got the show you've got. And, uh, I think you're doing a lot of good out there.
Thank you so much. And for all of you listening, I, I really don't mean to scare you with what we're
talking about for most of us who have been studying this for awhile. It's not that frightening
anymore. Let's just put it this way. We, we knew, uh, this was coming. John has been talking about
this for years and, you know, uh, for, for most who understand the economics of the world that
the illusion of money, uh, we know that this is coming. I think it's about time, even though
my message of slow-mo has always been to really get you to focus on living a better life on
reflecting on things that matter. I, as I said before today, this is something that matters. And,
you know, John was very, very generous with his advice. If you have money, turn it into either assets
or precious metals, uh, you know, currency itself might be a problem. If you have a little, then
perhaps try to save, try to change your lifestyle, develop a skill or a, you know, a, a, a, a craft of
some sort, and definitely try to offset some of your spending. Um, you know, we may not have to go
through any of that, even though most economists realize that we will, uh, but, you know, developing
this just keeps you safe if, uh, if we do go through it. Uh, with that, I, uh, thank you all
so much for giving me the opportunity to meet such incredible people, many of which are my heroes.
Uh, and, uh, yeah, I love you all for listening and I will see you next time.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
