Welcome to Live Players, where political scientists and strategists Samo Buria and I discuss the key individuals with the power to alter our current society.
Every week, we provide analysis of the news and case studies of live players, as well as key institutions and technologies that make up the global power landscape.
Let's dive in.
Yeah, let's get into it. I mean, we've talked about demographic issues in specific countries like India or China or some others.
Even Japan, and I mentioned it in Poland and Eastern Europe.
Yeah, and typically, of course, people are like, you know, immigration, but if we have it on a global scale, like, you know, we need people from somewhere.
So maybe let's have a broader conversation around demographics and the fertility crisis and underpopulation. Why don't you, when you start us off?
Well, I think that I will open with the provocation. We have no known demographic or cultural force that kicks in and stops us from reaching the TFR zero society.
Now, would I bet that there will be a TFR zero society in the next century? I tend to be an optimist.
I tend to say that we will figure this out and we will push in the other direction and something else will happen.
However, I think that if those activists who warn us of the reality of global warming can indulge in hyperbole of how this might, you know, end the world as we know it, I think that demographic changes that have already underwent are certain to end the world as we know it.
The only question is, will they end the world, the human world, full stop?
I have not heard anyone referred to basically, at least not in public, to the ongoing demographic contraction and drop in fertility rates happening globally as a source of existential risk.
Just as much as nuclear war or AI, it should be considered in the same category.
Let me make the case until very recently, people assumed that fertility would plateau at a very low 1.1 total fertility rate.
This is what we used to see in places like South Korea, places like Japan that are famous for their old population and low fertility.
At 1.3, Japan's actually now a middle fertility country.
Japan's no longer an outlier.
If anything, it's slowed down relatively to other countries accelerating their fertility decline.
So in a way, for East Asia, Japan is now a high fertility country and globally, it's a middling fertility country.
But once you break this barrier of TFR of 1.0, as they have in South Korea and gone as low as 0.7, or if you take Hong Kong on its own, its TFR right now is like 0.5.
And if we looked at the other major Chinese cities, if the Chinese Communist Party released accurate data, I bet we would see numbers worse than Hong Kong.
We would see numbers like 0.3 or 0.2 if they weren't adulterated or messed with.
Let's be real.
So if we have cities in the world that have tens of millions of people, so nation-sized, already seeing fertility of 0.3, 0.2, Eric, how long is it before we see a 0.1 city?
And how long before we see a city that it's not going to be literally 0.0, but could it be like 0.02 or 4?
I think it's just insane that no one's thinking, that everyone's assuming this must bounce back, everyone's assuming it must stop.
And now we're seeing it truly everywhere, right?
We talked about it in India, which is a very poor country, a very young country.
We talked about it in Eastern Europe, that's like middle income, sometimes very poor, depending on the country, also low fertility.
We talked about it in Japan, in America, in Britain.
It's truly happening everywhere.
And is there any country that has gotten below replacement rate in a serious way and then has bounced back to the degree that they've kind of made up for it?
And that might be the wrong way of thinking about that, even because it's, you know, it's time dependent.
You can't just make up for it, you know, in time maybe.
But have we seen significant bounce backs or not really?
Well, we have seen significant bounce backs in a few places.
I think that if you look at Eastern Europe, you will see that their fertility started crashing with the end of communism.
And so, you know, in the United States, you know, the lowest fertility on record happened for those countries or second lowest.
After that, they recovered, not above replacement, but they recovered from 0.2 or 0.3 up to 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 even.
Some of them have seen a second decline after the COVID years and now the post-COVID years.
The decline, by the way, is continuing.
It wasn't just during the social isolation, but if anything, it seems to be accelerating.
There are a number of countries who, to everyone's surprise, have now crashed below replacement, such as Turkey.
People were not expecting Turkey to be so below replacement so quickly because, again, Turkey is middle income by global standards, low income, low wealth by European standards still.
So, I think that historically, we did have a few cases, for example, the baby boom after World War II remains largely unexplained.
There are numerous countries that did not have a baby boom.
However, the United States and France did.
France returned above replacement due to the baby boom.
I also believe Germany was below replacement at some time and rose above replacement briefly in the same period.
So, most stories, by the way, for the baby boom is it's good to win a war.
And then, you know, you can argue, you know, the U.S. clearly won a war.
You can argue that France won the war.
That's already a sort of weird argument.
You can't really argue West Germany won the war.
So, and then if you say, oh, but it's economic expansion that causes an increase in fertility.
Well, that sounds on paper like it makes sense, but it's the opposite of what we say about countries in the 1990s and 2000s.
I think we just have to accept the truth that we don't understand fertility.
And look, there are just so few outliers.
We're literally talking about, okay, among countries we could class as high income or middle income.
I think we have like, I think Armenia, it's either Armenia or Georgia, and then there's Israel.
And Israel's fertility has also gone down, by the way, to be clear.
But Israel has like a healthy fertility despite being a modern country.
Maybe we can learn something from it, but what are you going to do?
Just cargo cult and just copy everything Israel does?
It's unlikely to work.
I don't think we actually know why Israel is for now still an outlier.
Note, an outlier might just mean that in the sort of distribution of fertility, it's going to take a bit longer, right?
Like maybe people are temporarily super motivated by what's basically an existential fight.
I could tell that story, by the way.
But if I'm telling that story, then why are the Ukrainians not having like three babies?
The Ukrainians seem no less patriotic or nationalist than the Israelis, to be honest, right?
And they're also fighting an existential war.
So where are their babies?
You know, it's really hard to tell a coherent theory, even for these few outliers or cases where we have bounce back that we see.
And is the best explanation for why this happens is just that as as modernity hits a society, the opportunity cost for women to have kids increases and thus they rather kind of do other stuff or, you know, and what do you think is the best explanation?
I mean, I mean, let's say, yeah, sure.
That makes sense.
Maybe the rest of our lives are just very interesting, like both men and women.
And then maybe for women, especially they're liberated and led into the workforce.
I feel the first argument is almost a stronger argument.
I've heard this from some of the progress studies people and some of the like Institute for Progress people.
You know, I feel like they're the they're the professional Panglossians of our era.
Right.
All is well.
The Big Mac is good for you.
You like it.
You enjoy it.
You want to eat it.
I feel like that's their job to say that.
And like, you know, maybe I'll put in a good word for cigarettes and, and, and nicotine and caffeine, though I don't smoke.
But I, you know, you're not going to catch me like defending diet Coke is the greatest drink ever invented and like peak of human experience.
I, you're just not going to hear me do that.
And we both have lots of friends, like, you know, nothing wrong if you like it, but people were memeing about it, if you remember.
So I feel like when, when, when they make some of their guys, I forget who on Twitter make this argument.
Oh, modern life has just gotten so good that we're enjoying it so much that raising babies just doesn't seem as fun.
I'm like, well, what is your opinion on North Korea?
Has North Korean life gotten so much better over the last 30 years that all the North Korean women are like so happy with their career and earning opportunities and opportunities to contribute to North Korean society that that has tanked their TFR?
It seems super unlikely, right?
At least if that's like the main thing driving it, it just seems extremely unlikely explanation.
I don't know anything about North Korea.
Did they have feminism?
Well, well, okay.
Let me propose.
While I'm sure Western propaganda exaggerates it, it's like one of the few truly totalitarian societies in the world and their economy is like sucks.
It's like super demoralizing to be in the workplace because you're, you're under political threat and economically you don't make a lot of money.
Sorry, sorry, Eric.
I don't want to be too neurodiverse here, but I thought I would say that explicitly for the audience.
If that's the case, why is their TFR collapsed?
Have they had just a, yeah.
I mean, not even to interrupt, but because I think we just don't know.
And that's the scariest.
Can you imagine if the planet was warming every year and we didn't know there was CO2 emissions?
I bet people would be way more worried about it.
I don't even think we'd be partisan about it.
I think we'd all be panicking and we'd be funding climate science to figure it out and starting to like seriously look at geoengineering to cool it.
It's only because we have tied the warming of the planet to carbon specifically.
Has it become like a proxy referendum for the car centric, AC centric suburban lifestyle and to a much lesser extent, the oil industry and the Middle East and all of these things.
But for some reason on fertility, I don't know.
I think, I think we're not, we, we pretend to know why it's declining and we have good stories, which is that human life is getting so much better.
And maybe a story where, you know, the planet can't support this many of us.
So there should be fewer of us or what's actually an extremely, you know, eugenicist argument, but that everyone loves to make both left and right.
Sort of like, well, it's, it's good that the population is shrinking because the wrong people were reproducing anyway.
Right. Like that's an argument you hear in common sections.
I see it all the time.
I just don't think it's true.
I think by most metrics, you know, it doesn't matter if you, if you hate the over-educated liberal, or if you, you know, hate the under-educated jokul and you think it's good for humanity that either of these groups kind of stops reproducing.
It doesn't matter because like both of them are failing to reproduce and especially even the people in the middle. Okay. The only community that currently in the United States has really good TFR.
There are like two. One is the literal billionaires. So if you are a literal billionaire, you will have above replacement fertility.
And that's not even due to Elon, like juicing the numbers. That's just normal, very wealthy Americans tend to have above replacement as such a tiny proportion of the population, them.
And it's like the Amish, not even the Amish and the Mormons, by the way, Mormon fertility has collapsed.
And for now, Amish fertility is like, it's not clear if it's noise in the data or if it's declining slowly, but let's, let's play out this world where everyone goes below replacement, except the Amish.
And then a thousand years from now, the result isn't that the Amish controlled the United States of America.
The result is that North America and South America and small parts of Europe, the Amish also have been resettling and buying some parts of Europe, are settled by humans.
And the humans do 18th century farming, and maybe they've kept tractors.
That's at the very least a complete collapse of the industrial base. Eric, I guarantee you the Amish will like not be working at TSMC.
Like there's just not, they're not going to be doing that. And if they start doing that, their fertility is going to go way down.
And I don't, I like, I like modern technology. I'm not anti it. So that seems scary.
Even if the humans technically survive because of the Amish and the Adamantese, Adamantese Islanders, the uncontacted tribes of, you know, Brazil and the Indian Ocean islands.
We've basically established that this is happening globally.
Yeah.
It's really everywhere for reasons we can't exactly understand. And people have tried, countries have tried different interventions and nothing has really worked in a durable or a repeatable way.
So should we be hopeless basically? Should we just accept that in the next, you know, generation, we're going to have, you know, a significantly underpopulated society from, from what we have now.
Like people were always like, Oh, there'll be 9 billion people by, you know, by X date.
But should we accept a world where there's 6 billion, 5 billion, you know, when, when, when I looked into this with my team, our conclusion was that by the end of the century, there will be fewer than 1 billion Indians.
So from South Asia, and I bet if we looked at some of these other places, we would arrive at similar results.
In some places, even the population explosion was exaggerated. Like in the case of Nigeria, there's like strong evidence that the individual states are juicing their population numbers because there's no nationwide census.
However, federal oil money is distributed within Nigeria on a key based on the population of a state.
So there was a decade long incentive to exaggerate population and population growth, and a blocking of the federal government just counting the people in the country.
So it was kind of a states got to self report how many people live there. And the more people that live there, the more oil revenue, the elites got in that state. So that's pretty straightforward.
And then in China, I think the Communist Party, this is one of the few things that Zai Hong gets right, they have been incentivized to paper over just how disastrous the one child policy is.
So I bet they're currently exaggerating their fertility numbers significantly, even though, by the way, it's been a few years since they stopped the policy and fertility didn't rebound.
Now, to answer your question into why was I raising Nigeria and these other countries, it was to say, I'm not even sure we're going to hit 9 billion.
Like I think currently it's what we're 8 billion people, eight and a half, maybe I would not be surprised that if we could completely accurately count world population, that it doesn't peak like slightly above 9 billion.
It might on paper due to China and Nigeria and other places. Let me check. Yeah, current world population is apparently as of 2022, it was 7.95 billion.
So we currently believe it to be over 8 billion. I don't I'm not even sure it's going to ever go actually to 9 billion.
And if it does a very soon after, I think it's going to fall. And this is much more pessimistic than the UN projections.
You could look at these graphs year after year at the official population estimates look like, you know, fertility goes up and then it goes down and then it stabilizes.
And this latter part is always fiction. It's just always fiction. But even after every year, the peak gets lower and the fall gets faster.
They just keep drawing a line that surely this will stabilize. It might, but I don't think it's going to happen automatically.
I actually think it's not going to happen automatically.
Hey, everybody, Eric here with a word from our sponsors.
The tech world turns to the Brave browser for its unbeatable privacy protections.
But did you know that Brave also has a private ad platform?
Brave ads offers first party targeting and it's been cookie list since day one.
So you can relax while third party tracking cookies disappear from the web.
Today, millions of people turn to ad blockers to avoid being tracked and pestered online.
But Brave's new ad model aligns incentives for users and advertisers.
Users earn rewards for viewing ads, which they can save, spend or pass along to their favorite creators.
And advertisers score points for respecting user privacy, generating ROI without invasive tracking.
So whether it's high impact announcements on the new tab page or keyword targeted ads in Brave Search, Brave Search offers diverse, private, future proof ad formats for all your business goals.
Join the future of advertising at brave.com slash ads.
Mention turpentine to get 25% off your first campaign.
What is your sort of assumption as it relates to life expectancy?
And as you think about your projection, are you expecting that to stay the same or expecting it to increase?
Is that, you know, is that meaningful?
I think that on the margin, we are going to live longer than ever before with, I think, health spans, especially if we continue developing anti-obesity drugs.
That's the important part because the world has gotten very fat.
Like for example, India and Mexico have greater obesity problems now than the United States, which is crazy to consider, right?
Like more, you know, more trouble with diabetes and so on.
But because of that, that is the great shortening of health span.
As people have gotten much fatter, their health span has contracted note in the United States.
Do you know what's been happening to life expectancy for the last few years?
It's been dropping.
It's been decreasing.
It's been dropping.
Why is that health related?
It's basically if you, you know, again, if you don't have diabetes, if you're not a drug addict, if you don't kill yourself.
And suicides have been high, by the way, suicides have been increasing.
And if you're not overweight, well, you know, that's why I said that I think that the anti-obesity drugs will once introduced into the United States.
Europe, which has also been getting fatter, though slower in East Asia, where, by the way, in China, people are for the first time having an obesity problem.
But also India and Mexico and Turkey and Saudi Arabia, I think these drugs will extend health span.
So I think that by the end of this century, I predict that the focus on health and well-being will mean that people in their 50s and 60s will look closer to the way people in their 40s look today.
So and they'll feel more energetic and they'll be younger.
I don't think we will make very much progress on slow aging related cognitive decline.
So while 60 year olds might look like 40 year olds today, they will be slightly dimmer than 40 year olds today.
Now, of course, in many professions, actually, crystallized intelligence outdoes fluid intelligence.
However, the intelligence of the population, the average intelligence surely matters.
Let us remember a global graying implies also the world becoming stupider or at least more forgetful.
And I'm not even talking about Alzheimer's.
I'm just talking about non Alzheimer's related age decline and ability to adapt.
Right. So, yeah.
Yeah. I mean, maybe that missed your question, but there's so many like you can there's so many threads we can pull on this where the prognosis is super negative.
I do think it's worth talking about health care.
Like if I were to find a silver lining to this, you know, to the silver haired global population, I think for the first time ever, we're going to have a database that's going to have the health statistics of 400 million 90 year olds.
They're just not. I'm not even sure there have been 400 million 90 year olds in like all of human history.
I don't know what the current global number is. It probably is like a few million.
We could look, we could ask, you know, one of these, one of the AIs, how many there are.
But I think even if there are a few million, we've not collected data on them as a demographic because they're not consumers.
Now in Japan, we saw the shift where as Japan grade, you know, the market for adult diapers and alternate care and like various forms of automation for like beds that like move you out of the bed automatically and stuff like that.
There was a market for that.
So I think the pharmaceutical industry will have hundreds of millions of customers who want solutions to these terrible old age diseases.
Now, because of this, I could see global, you know, assuming the suicide thing doesn't get even worse, which is a big if.
And assuming we solve obesity through basically pharmaceutical means globally.
I think that we might see people reaching 100, like living to 100 and being healthy and active and working until they're like late 60s.
Right. Maybe up to 70 for people with good genetics, with lucky genetics, I should say.
All genetics, you know, every almost every phenotype you see in the population has advantages and disadvantages.
Right. The same gene that might be an Olympic power lifter might actually mean that, you know, at 70, you're going to have bone issues or something like that.
Yeah. So circling back a little bit.
Are there any interventions that we're excited about?
You know, people, you know, think about tax benefits, you know, childcare, like, you know, these things that kind of on the margins.
Right. Tax credits or whatever. But like, should we be having a Manhattan project for for increasing the population?
Like how big of a priority should we be making getting back to, you know, should should Elon have a thousand or thousands?
Like, should Elon spark a narrative, you know, sort of a movement of all these rich people having, you know, you know, more kids almost like factory style, just like because we need babies.
Like how severe is this potential crisis and what should be done about?
I think I'm raising the alarm right now somewhat provocatively because I think it is possible that this might lead to human extinction or civilizational collapse.
I was already worried about civilizational collapse for a variety of reasons in our civilization 10 years ago.
But I have to admit, I personally assumed that low fertility would stay a Western problem.
I didn't actually assume they would affect the third world, at least not until it became rich.
But that's not what happened. And that's been one of the biggest surprises of my, you know, adult intellectual life.
In a way, I priced in AI progress because I was reading, you know, it was better back then, but I was reading less wrong back in like 2009, 10, 11, overcoming bias, all of that stuff.
No one was, no one was predicting a global fertility decline.
Lots of people were saying, Oh, maybe, you know, maybe feminism is the problem.
And like, maybe Islam will overtake us all, but you know, no one was saying, Oh, actually, you know, Turkey and eventually places like Egypt are going to be low fertility too.
No one was saying that. So I would say that we should be very concerned and we should try many different things.
I commend Hungary for having tried significant tax breaks for people with children.
I think now is the right time to push for tax breaks for families.
The reason is the old people haven't yet realized that they're socialists.
Okay, baby boomers in America still think that they basically benefit from the free market.
They don't realize that society is structurally more and more in the future going to be built towards transferring to the old from the young, because the young work and the old vote.
So if you have that setup, that surely goes towards massive wealth transfers some way or another.
So right now, I think, you know, and I could cite the article, who is Portugal for that was published by Vasco, Vasco Quirios in Palladium magazine, where he points out that, you know, in Portugal, that's already happened.
The old rely, who are now such a big part of the population, reliably vote for pensions and various other benefits for the old.
Right. So that is definitely the case there already.
Portugal is a bit ahead of the U.S., partially because of immigration, partially because until 2010, America was a religious country.
I don't think it is very much today, but back in the early 2000s, the U.S. was an exception.
It had a large population of Christians also observant Jews and so on, which Europe did not.
Right. And East Asia did not. And they had higher fertility.
Now, you know, the culture warriors of, you know, the center left can congratulate themselves.
You know, the new atheist fight has been won.
Young Americans are about as secular as young Europeans.
However, as a side effect, that little fertility bump went away.
And, you know, I don't think, by the way, staying religious is a solution.
It's just staying religious helps.
It's like your decline is slower and you still have more babies than the people who are religious.
And, you know, this effect can be pretty extreme together with a radically different lifestyle as seen in the case of the Amish.
But I don't think it's just that the Amish are that much more pious than Iranian Muslims.
I think it's just the case that the lifestyle is very different.
Right. The Iranian Muslims, they they might have bearded policemen harassing underdressed women in the street, but they live a modern lifestyle, including the women.
Right. The women go to university, have PhDs.
The men work office jobs.
And, you know, the bearded men policing the women, you know, they're not members of your clan or something.
They're just literally the national religious police.
So it's kind of like it's a weirdly modern state and perhaps one worth an episode to discuss.
Like, how does Iran work? Right.
Recently, Iran was in the news with the missile barrage of Israel.
Yeah. Perhaps we should have an Israel and Iran two episodes.
Yeah. We never avoid controversy. I think we're going to go right into it.
Yeah. So so I think we could be thinking about like, first off, we should publicly praise people with a lot of babies.
I think we should make it clear that, you know, having babies is like, first off, it's like patriotic.
Secondly, it's good for society. Third, it's good for us keeping a liberal society, because at the end of the day, you know, if the highest fertility countries are the illiberal countries and the illiberal countries can stop their people from moving into liberal countries.
Which, by the way, for example, North Korea. Right. It doesn't have a high fertility, but it certainly stops people from leaving, doesn't it? Right.
And I bet China, if it were to try very hard, could stop people leaving China pretty effectively.
So in that world, those countries are just going to have more fighting age young men and they're going to have a better economy than we do.
And like, that's the reason, you know, it's like, sure, the immigration question, it's like, fine, though, I have to ask, you know, if a Nigerian moves from Nigeria where they would have had six babies and they moved to the United States and they have three babies and then their babies have one point five babies each.
Each, you know, this is like, good for the United States. It's probably good for the Nigerian family. It's probably not good for Nigeria, because they probably lost very, you know, smart fraction person.
And it's certainly not good for global population. Right. So if we if we could magically move half of Africa into Europe and America, the result wouldn't be that there will be a higher global population at the end of the century.
The result would be a much lower global population at the end of the century.
So I just want to make that point that not only is while immigration is a solution to stay ahead if you do it smart, though, of course, Canada, France, Sweden demonstrate what happens when you do it not smart, then it's a detriment.
Britain, Britain recently, it is actually globally a negative if what you're trying to do is keep global population at least stable rather than collapsing.
Right. So so we have to look again at fertility intervention. These can be tax breaks.
I think tax breaks are excellent because let's be real. I think parents, when they raise their children, it used to be like they're producing more mouths to feed.
These children are going to get welfare. All the welfare is going to be going to the old people.
That's how the political economy works. They're doing work. Anyone who's raising their children to be like decent, like peaceful, economically productive, entrepreneurial, smart people.
They're doing a society such a big favor. They're giving positive externalities to all of those of us who choose to be childless.
So I think the liberal argument, the liberal social argument for having tax breaks for families is there.
And I wish my center left friends would like to listen to my center right friends about this because it really doesn't have to be a cultural war issue.
We could just do it right. We could just do it and we help on the margin.
It's helping Hungary a little bit. It's too expensive for Hungary.
But, you know, I bet if the US did this, it would work better because the US is richer and you earn more personally.
So the tax break is actually more money. I don't think we're ever going to drag homo economicus by the collar towards reproducing.
I think homo economicus is sort of, you know, oh, God, I could be so spicy.
Let me just say, you know, let me just say lots of animals do not breed in captivity.
So if your main motivation is financial gain, I think you are in a form of captivity.
Yes. What what means? Yes. Yeah. What means? Exactly. Right. Right.
Home. Maybe maybe slaves were also homo economicus. Right. Except under coercion.
Yeah. And so I want to zoom back out to when you say, hey, this could lead to the result of human extinction.
Like on what timeline or what is the timeline that we should be worried about?
Because you mentioned, hey, you know, we might still have a billion Indians, which is, you know, that's plenty.
Yeah. Concerning, but not human extinction.
So why don't you talk about what is the default case of if things don't change?
How is this going to play out? Well, let's talk about it.
Let's talk about it because it really depends on how rapidly we're going.
I think if the fertility drop like literally stops this year, I'm relieved.
In that case, we're going to have billions of people at the end of the century.
Technology can progress. The global economy might not grow very much, even if AI leaps, goes ahead and leaps and bounds.
If the world's population is smaller at the end of this century, we might also be poor.
Like we should actually that we should factor that in and I can talk through the economics of that, because as long as AI doesn't automate everything, more people does make you wealthier.
Right. Because, you know, what is a Jevons paradox is is the term in economics, I believe, where if you partially automate a job.
So if you automate almost all of the dock work, but not the last 2%, then the dock workers are super well paid and their union is super powerful.
But once you crush the remaining 2%, then the dock workers are obsolete.
And at that point, you know, they're organizing their last stand right now, which I don't support.
I think we should have automated docks.
And I think there are plenty of other jobs in logistics that they could productively do that have not been automated, just to be clear on that issue.
And I think that if the population drops, stop.
There's just no evidence that they will.
So if the TFR drops continue like going down, let's say they globally go down to a South Korean level.
OK, in like or let's be more optimistic.
Let's say that global fertility is the same as that of Thailand.
Well, in Thailand over the next 100 years, we can expect a minus 89% reduction in population.
So if the current population, 8 billion people, we reduce that by 90%.
We're left with 800 million people.
Isn't that great?
Isn't that scary?
And that's Thailand numbers.
That's not South Korean numbers.
That's not Hong Kong numbers.
That's Thailand numbers.
OK, so 800 million people might just be enough to crash industrial society.
Or it might result in everyone living in North America, Japan, Western Europe, Istanbul, and a few big cities in India and Africa.
Because what happens with modern day Japan?
You would think, you know, real estate prices should be going down in Tokyo.
They're mostly not Tokyo keeps them low, much lower than many other cities of Tokyo size.
So it's great public policy.
But people move from the rest of Japan to Tokyo.
who do να την navy quix出去 radiätta nostalg MODERATION no reason for anything like this.
This is really interesting.
I guess that's definitely how to fly that here.
How to fly that in Greece since they are toАnment of London.
And so it's kind of huge, fear of what we'reəod proven.
Okay.
and they're like well but no one wants to live in the middle of nowhere i think what people miss
is that our standards for what is the middle of nowhere keep going up as we urbanize as a species
we've already talked about how we are more urbanized today a greater proportion of humanity
lives in cities today than at any other point in human history so our standards for what is
a high status big city keep going up look if san francisco is what san francisco narrowly is like
500 000 600 000 people that would have been one of the greatest cities in population in medieval europe
no one would call san francisco a small town and to people outside of sf it might be weird but people
here often comment that you know this is a surprisingly small town for how important it is
because they're comparing themselves to literally new york and la and london right and the result then
is within countries like japan italy and spain more and more places get called nowhere because the
standard is rising for what is a big city slowly because of cultural changes due to urbanization
and simultaneously the population of the country is going down which means that more and more cities
tip over to being nowhere for educated and well-off people and they don't want to live there the
economically productive people don't want to live there well there are no jobs there and then you
might see the kind of depopulation that you see in northern england or the rust belt where people start
leaving or the abandoned villages and honestly towns and eventually cities of japan so world of 800 million
people and assume that open borders have happened i think a world of 800 million people might still be
industrialized okay let's wait for another 100 years 80 million people i guarantee you after 200 years
those 80 million people are not going to be industrialized or if they are they're living off of
literally old chips literally all their all their steel is recycled from old buildings
they just maintain old buildings they don't build any new buildings dude if you live in a world of 80
million people that build housing let's let's be pessimistic and say we've only built housing for
4 billion people and let's say that half of that housing or three quarters of it are gone after 200
years which by the way is a reasonable number if you look at say europe or the middle east people routinely
live in 200 year old houses like that's normal in places with that long history okay a world with 80 million
people and housing for a billion do they build any new houses they truly if they maintain something
like an industrial living standard i think they're living in like a truly like post-industrial society
like scavengers like highly organized scavengers among the ruins and then you know i'm not even sure
that happens that they're going to be that effective but you know at that point we are what if that were
to continue for 200 years that's 200 years of no one having above replacement babies like they
probably came up with some rationalization for why it's good that humanity is going extinct so so
this by the way is my scary scenario of a setup that just leads to human extinction because they might
just be like oh you know we're just all gonna commit euthanasia and we're gonna live super comfortably
on the remnants of old material production until we do because that's extremely i'm gonna call it that's
fucked up but that could happen well it could happen in parallel with agi happening to some degree
and and the reverse question being like wait if ai can do everything better than humans can do
what should humans actually do and is it okay that we have you know half the population or a third of
the population or or whatever well but eric we're talking about 80 million people in this scenario we're
not talking about a billion happy rich humans lording over ai serfs super intelligent ai serfs for
some reason and the ai serfs keep us around for some reason despite being super intelligent kind of
doesn't make sense when i say it that way but let's pretend it does we're talking about 80 million people
and you know i worry that i worry that ai will just enable human extinction
and i think that's pretty bad i'm like very much in favor of humans i'm like happy for other
life forms to exist but i'm very happy with humans i like humans i think it's morally valuable that we
exist i think we're a very interesting part of nature so i don't even believe that we are in
opposition or war or fallen from nature in any way so i think that's very sad scenario number two we don't
get full automation but we get enough automation to on the margin make things better i think the test
case for this is japan eric when japan starts having explosive economic growth again that's when we
will know that you know automation has outpaced aging right because the countries like south korea and
japan that have had zero or very low immigration uh those are just going to be the countries that
actually pull ahead economically i mean at the same time as larger population countries but we'll see
that recovery i see no evidence of that recovery at best i see a sort of red queen race where japan
even as its gdp gently starts to decline it has to make the young workers ever more productive
to support an ever larger population of old people that need supporting
and then let me go a step further remember when i said a a a gray world is a dumb forgetful world
well it's also an inflexible world they use fax machines in japan and so on right like i actually
think the rate of innovation is going to slow down eric like wouldn't you feel personally kind of bad
about ai progress if 40 years from now the only people still charging ahead on ai would be elon musk
sam altman and you know and no one knew had showed up you know that the fewer smart young
people we have the lower the odds are of the next dario amodei or demis hasabes or elon musk or sam
altman are like we we might not hit that point now but we might hit that in 60 60 or 50 years from
now right because for now we're like we're like kind of taking a full in infusion of all of
india's talent that we can grab to keep us alive and i think that that's like it's not going to
keep working yeah do you also worry about robin hansen's theory of cultural drift or his sort of
concern about this kind of like homogenization or um have you followed he has a concrete theory of
cultural change let me put this way i'm convinced that would ever social technologies caused human
beings to breed have broken down i do not believe we know what they are because again you can be
anti-feminist in certain ways a lot of people assume it must be feminism or or women's liberation
related stuff but if you look at iran i think iran is a counter case to that so it might be something
subtle where women's rights can destroy it but it's also destroyed by a theocratic state like iran
and then it's like maybe a bigger modernity thing whether or not you have women's rights as such so
i'm certainly convinced something changed culturally but i think unlike robin hansen i assumed that by
default the social technologies making up civilization change a lot and i think he thinks that the selection
pressures keep culture functional and i disagree with him i think selection pressures can work on culture
in a very long timeline but for the last 4 000 years the rate of cultural evolution has been too
rapid and changes too rapid to be explained by like a natural selection style mechanism so i don't think
group selection has been dominating which global cultures are or how cultures change i think basically
live players and society has done that and that's why i'm optimistic i think that if live players
dedicated themselves to reforming societies to run social experiments to run technological experiments
to try to get humanity we're on a timer we're on a timer to reinvent social technology that causes us
to breed or we will go extinct we might be replaced by super intelligence we might be replaced by the
forests we might be replaced by nothing because we destroy the planet on the way out right like all of
these might happen but we are on a timer to figure out social technology to start breeding again and i
want to encourage the live players listening to this don't think you know what's going on you almost
certainly don't i have like looked far and wide the smartest people in the world have no idea why this
is happening lots of people will capitalize it politically and will lie and will confuse themselves and
be arrogant and think that their political option has the solution but we just don't know yet so my first
so so my my call to live players is to figure it out like go ahead figure it out experiment do anything
you can and you know maybe it'll work out now again hopefully five years from now we'll like do a
follow-up on this episode and i'll say thank god i had no cause to be worried but i'm not i'm not sure if i had
to bet against it today i would bet against it and someone wants to take me up on that bet five years
from now i'll do that long back with you or 10 years from now i would do a long a long bet uh the
long now foundation has like special mechanisms where you basically give money to charity and it's
held in a trust and it's invested above returns and that's we that's how you can make economically
rational long-term bets as long as you're okay with the money going to charity so i'll do a long bet
with any viewer that i probably won't regret it but i hope i will like saying this on on today's show
i did talk to tyler cowen about the politics of this because one thing we see is like
it's not really pop like it's popular to worry about climate change it's popular to worry about
yeah dumerism it's not really popular to worry about under population one reason could be a lot
of women kind of get threatened or don't like it you know because when the immediate implication is oh
you know like they get you know women's feminism or you know sort of women's education which was
like the big focus you know for the last couple decades or women's employment or something and
we talked about hey because it's happening in iran it's not just that but that's one reason but
there are other reasons why it's kind of like weird or seen as like if you look at the people who are
publicly about it they're kind of seen as weird in some ways so it's hard to rally up like i don't think
we're gonna have you know when i was in college i took classes on global warming i don't think
you know we're gonna have classes on underpopulation in the next decade or something
everyone was worried about overpopulation and i i do wonder basically what are the politics
of getting people worried about this significant sufficiently so that they take action in a way
that is commensurate with the with the need i don't know if it's a manhattan level project i don't
know if it's you know all the you know elons or the richest people sort of you know i think even
the main intellectuals haven't updated in a recent interview to give an example of someone who used
to be prominent in the new atheist movement that i mentioned from the early 2000s right that was
trying to further secularize the western world richard dawkins was surprised in an interview earlier
this year to hear that fertility rates are below replacement in india and a lot of islamic countries it
doesn't match his model right his model was you know poor or more religious people have more babies
and etc etc i think that and even in israel you know we talked about israel earlier but there's a
cultural war happening within israel not even among palestinians and jewish israelis or like muslim
israelis and jewish israelis even within outside of the gaza and west bank and all that stuff but between
the high fertility orthodox minority which is a large minority of the country in the more secular
population do i recall correctly that recently there was a push to have the religious exemption
from military service removed right that's a big deal but first off it might be militarily necessary
that's true and secondly i bet the secular population of the country like they want to keep tel aviv
good for gay people right like they want to keep it like you know nice open and they're okay with a
large religious minority but they might not be okay with a religious majority right but still that would
be an example of a political struggle within a country pushing the country towards lower fertility
i think here's another weird idea i think when countries fought more wars there was an incentive to
increase your population right more manpower but if countries only fight internal political power
struggles i think you're always incentivized to reduce the other side's voting pool right and you
know you can have the opposite strategy of increasing your voting pool either through you know there are
people who have tried to raise fertility to have more more christians for example the so-called quiverful
movement or progressives basically just import whatever voters they need in the united states
from any country in the world that happens happens to have a high population and that's another way to
increase the amount of voters you get but i think that there's something about the politics of modern
countries that means that political struggles tend to be won by the lower fertility factions
and i'm not quite sure why that is but it's something worth investigating like i agree that it seems weird
though i think honestly it's less weird today than 10 years ago i think if 15 years ago you were
concerned about low fertility i think people vaguely thought you were racist or something
right no no for real because you were talking about you know that those are the talking points
right or that you're worried about islamic islamicization of europe or something now if you
talk about it it seems a little weird i think the problem is that if you're seen advocating for high
fertility right now it still sounds like you're advocating for your own high fertility and you
know in some cases if the shoe fits you know again elon's cool but you know he both advocates for
people have a lot of babies and has a lot of babies so you know you can maybe see it in a self-serving way
but i think the perception that it is self-serving could be contested and i actually think that we should
start also noting that the child free movement like child free movement people were also always kind of
weird so i think it's just weird to talk about other people's fertility and it makes everyone
uncomfortable like whether you want to increase it or decrease it it makes people uncomfortable
because it's an intensely personal decision and it's intensely personal but the social science reality is
that we do respond to macroeconomic conditions social policy religious incentives we make the
decision personally but the facts on which we make our decision well you know those are society-wide
so i think it's squaring the circle so that it it sounds like we're mostly talking about
non-coercive reproduction though you know i would not be shocked if like you know i i don't know i
wouldn't be shocked if if countries start taking on reproduction themselves if families won't provide
that's what i'm wondering like do we have a bunch of baby centers like a bunch of genghis khans but or
even governments themselves being like hey this is a priority and if people aren't going to have them
we're just going to make them note note a genghis khan that gives a million women one baby does not
actually increase the country's tfr so that's important to keep in mind so if you're doing harems you got
you got to do four or five babies per per polyamorous partner or whatever you want to call them
well if like elon is offering his sperm to any woman who wants like you know like is there a
hypergamous you know fit here where it's enough men who have good sperm offer it to you know now we're
talking crazy ideas i don't know if the women are truly selecting for sperm but i'm not sure they even
are i think that's like a i think there's a weird way in which like actually very few people think
explicitly about the characteristics of their babies and i think that usually the desire to have
babies with someone comes from wanting to share social status with them and social standing so if
you're one of a thousand if you're one of ten elon baby mamas okay there's some status there if you're
one of ten thousands elon baby mamas it kind of starts losing stops losing any social advantage
right there's no like and there's the odds of your child having an active parent go from like
interesting odds to like nil right so i think that the likelier thing that might happen in
some east asian countries they might attempt to produce basically like they might first off
encourage people to donate eggs and sperm let's consider the following set of cultural evolutions
that happen in an east asian country that doesn't have basically judeo-christian taboos which by the
way is most of east asia most of east asia even the more western democracy etc they tend to be non-christian
non-islamic non-jewish societies so let's go there and as a result they tend to think about bodies and
biology differently than we do right like they're more open to bioengineering stuff they're more animist
for example they're more happy to think of a machine as having a soul even if it's not yet an ai right so
of course when an ai show up they're not going to be confused at all they're going to be like yeah this
thing clearly has a soul my toyota land rover had a soul like this thing also has a soul
so that's what i mean by stepping away from judea from the abrahamic assumptions because islam
actually shares a lot of these so you could have an evolution where it starts with okay we have a
national fertility crisis and look at all of these women in their 40s who want to have babies but don't
get to as a public health measure when you turn 18 you have to get your eggs and sperm frozen
we're just mandating this you could imagine this being said and you could imagine it being done
and then you could imagine there being health or ethical objections you could have like the same
way you could write a health or ethical objection for getting out of the draft or getting a health
a particular health condition would exempt you from some mandatory vaccinations on the same principle
they might have mandatory freezing of sperm and eggs okay so you have mandatory freezing of sperm and eggs
run forward 20 years okay ivf has been fully legalized surrogacy is very common i think by the
the way surrogacy will be extremely common in most of the world very soon because it's you know already
become a trend among well-off people and also allows various kinds of genetic screening and genetic
enhancement however the market is not providing not enough people are hiring the already existing class
of basically professional baby bearers like the surrogates themselves who are paid for their work
right and for carrying the baby so the government is like well our economy is so you know
what we should start doing this so we are going to start subsidizing surrogacy first off okay step number two
we're going to start encouraging citizens to donate the eggs and sperm that they have saved up to the
government repopulation program okay that's another step people are encouraged to donate some people write
it in their will and then the government picks on some key or just makes it random to avoid the politics of
it gets a baby it gets a embryo made has the embryo implanted in a surrogate and when the baby is born
having been you know in a professional surrogate that sometimes gives babies to private couples
or the japanese government uh the baby is a ward of the state and is given up for foster care
then you just scale up foster care okay you've made parenting a job and you've made bearing babies a job
i don't think this will be a very emotionally healthy way to make babies but would it work yes
would it work well enough to be above replacement i'm not sure so that's one possible kind of extreme
that let's call that the extreme social democratic solution right social democracy where you consider
fertility to be part of your duty just as like paying a high progressive tax as part of your duty
to repay all these goods and services you've received in your life from society right like the same arguments
can be applied and then i'm not sure how this works in the united states or europe like i don't i think
it could totally work like this in japan in south korea maybe in singapore in china i i just don't see how
it would work in easily in abrahamic societies now i think in saudi arabia you might see the genghis
khan solution where they might issue a fatwa that says you know what actually you know god wants us to
breed we're temporarily lifting you know it's it's permissible to have babies with more than just
four women as long as you give each of the women at least three babies and then the status game they
already have about having a lot of wives like that continues and is extended further and whatever
remains of their oil wealth is spent on creating more saudi citizens that could be the country where i see
the genghis khan thing work it's the world where the prestige isn't having lots of children and you
kind of force it that way and you sustain it through a non-modern economic model because
but that's like an interesting question will the saudi still be pumping oil 100 years from now
like probably not so if that happens that happens in like the 2050s and then the other solution is that
oh the surrogates are skipped all together and they're just like baby factories and maybe you'd
like corporations or people or governments are investing in babies being born and raised but you
know what eric then we get into an awfully tricky situation that starts to inch towards slavery if we're
like producing humans and using some however obfuscated legal or economic mechanism to take from their labor
to pay for their existence dude that's slavery with more steps right yeah like actually and maybe
you'll take that i don't think it will but it's kind of funny i think fertility kind of breaks our
ideas about property economic externalities i think we've been breeding for non-economic reasons for
the longest time and as soon as you start to give a state reason or an economic reason to breed it gets
weird but it gets weirder than that like assume genetic engineering keeps on progressing dude these states
are going to do the worst things possible to the human genome they're going to like transform the
human species into something utterly alien i mean i still prefer utterly alien hominids that always pay
their taxes and never litter to just pure ai and no human descendants but it's like sure it feels worse
than this like kind of wild type humanity we still are we're heavily domesticated but no one's centrally
planning our genetics i think the central planning of genetics will be a disaster
and the distributed planning of genetics personal choice reproduction that's great but you would
need a high fertility culture it's not enough to be like i have one super baby then state central
planning of genetics wins to have individual planning of future genetics to have libertarian genetic
engineering you must have a i have five super babies that's way better than your two super babies
because my five super babies are like you know they have higher odds of achieving great things or
whatever ideology you cook up so i i think that especially when you add genetic engineering to the
mix a high fertility is a must high fertility cultures are a must for any would-be free culture
and maybe that's a good spot to end it on yeah a note of uh of caution or concern and also a call
but also optimism in a way you know maybe the world where everyone has lots and lots of babies and they
either change their genetics or not like that's not that bad a world that's actually fine let's wrap
on that as always a great conversation samuel until next time great talking thanks for listening to live
players please subscribe leave a review and check out samo's excellent newsletter the bismarck brief
for more rigorous analysis of key individuals institutions or industries live players is a
production of turpentine the podcast network behind econ 102 with noah smith and moment of zen
hey everyone eric here at turpentine we're building the first media outlet for tech people by tech
people we're the network behind the show you're listening to right now we have a slate of hit shows
across a range of topics and industries from our ai and investing cluster of podcasts to shows that
drive the conversation in tech with the most interesting thinkers founders investors and influencers
like econ 102 with noah smith we're launching new shows every week and we're looking for industry
leading sponsors if you think that might be you and your company email me at ericaterpentine.co
that's e-r-i-k at turpentine.co and let's partner together
