Patreon is in crisis. It's in a financial crisis but also an identity crisis,
one which risks undermining some of its most fundamental founding principles.
And I think both Patreon creators and their supporters should be pretty concerned.
Let me explain. About six months ago, I received an email from Patreon.
Which makes me sound way more important than I am,
it was actually just a mailing list email which was sent, presumably, to every creator with a Patreon
page. Nevertheless, I received an email which was sent from Patreon to me, among others.
The email revealed that Patreon was going to be removing the goals feature from creators' pages.
For the unacquainted, this was a function which allowed creators to set a series of targets,
either for how much money they were receiving each month or how many total supporters they
had on the platform. And it always seemed to be a relatively popular feature.
Many used it as a way to incentivise more sign-ups by promising to make particular,
in-demand bits of content only after crossing certain milestones.
This Big Joel video about Click? That was a Patreon goal. As were these.
The decision to remove such a useful, popular feature was a bit of a shock.
But it was their rationale for doing so which really caught my attention.
To quote that email which was sent personally to me,
Goals were originally intended to help creators grow their pages. But we found only 4.5% of creators
with in-progress goals were gaining more patrons. Let me repeat that last bit for you. Only 4.5% of
creators with in-progress goals were gaining more patrons. It fascinates me that this figure didn't
come under more scrutiny at the time. There are several channels which report on the so-called
creator economy which I would have expected to have been all over this. But hey, I guess Colin and
Samir needed to make another video about how MrBeast is cool that week. Trawling the internet,
the most I could find about this was a single tweet from Patrick Willems and a Reddit thread with less
than 35 upvotes. Either no one had noticed or no one dared talk about the obvious implications of
that 4.5% figure. That Patreon might not be in the rudest of hell. The long and the short of it is that
it's not. After years of mind-boggling growth, a sudden stagnation in the number of new creators
and supporters joining the site has shaken Patreon to its core. Worse still, the panic this crisis
appears to have provoked in the company's investors and management has prompted the rollout of sweeping
changes to the platform, which not only risk exacerbating that crisis but ultimately undermining
Patreon's founding mission of enabling creators to make a living from their work. This video has
been a tricky one to make. I like Patreon. I think it is a good service at its core and that its impact
on the online creative landscape has overall been a massively positive one. But to truly understand
the magnitude of the crisis that Patreon is facing and the difficulty of finding a way out of it,
we need to understand the journey the company's been on so far. The story of Patreon is one of creators
and creativity, yes, but it's also one of vanity, venture capital investment and stock valuations.
At its heart, it's something of a morality tale, about how profit-oriented investors can corrupt even
the most exciting ideas. Come with me then and witness the rise… and fall… of Patreon.
Thank you so much for my Patreon supporters who make this possible. And if you are a patron of Easy Allies,
thank you. And thank you especially to all of my supporters on Patreon. I suggest becoming a patron.
Don't thank us, thank our patrons. All that remains is for me to thank my top-tier Patreon supporters.
On the 7th of May 2013, Jack Conti uploaded this video to his YouTube channel. It's a music video
for his then-latest song Pedals, which is, for the record, an absolute banger. All the lyrics are
taken from the names of the many, many effects pedals in Conti's music studio and it features two
separate motorised robots. Nevertheless, the video is less notable for the song itself than for what
comes after it. After the credits roll, Conti explains that he and a friend, Sam Yam, have just
launched a website called Patreon. It's like a Kickstarter for people who release stuff on a
regular basis instead of people who are just concentrating on one thing, like a movie or an
album. It's for the thousands of content creators now, tens of thousands, who have this beautiful,
prolific output and it's for them, it's for us. Now, this was a pretty bold way to describe Patreon
as it then existed. Far from tens of thousands of creators, at this point it featured just three,
Conti himself, his girlfriend Natalie Dawn and their roommate Lauren O'Connell. But it reflected
well the ambition he had for the site. According to company lore, Conti had come up with the idea for
Patreon the previous January. By this point, he was already a pretty successful creator, with a
sizeable following on YouTube for both his band, Pomplamoose and his solo career. But the finances
of it all weren't really adding up. Of course, the reason that Jack Conti is on the Ted stage here
is that he wasn't the only creative type struggling to balance the books in the mid-2010s.
This was an industry-wide problem. The internet had made it possible for artists, writers, musicians
and other creatives to build global fan bases without needing the approval of the corporate
gatekeepers in their respective industries. But few had managed to turn this online popularity
into an income. A strange scenario existed where it was possible to have a sizeable,
passionate following and yet still be struggling to pay the rent. By 2013, the idea that creatives
might solicit funding directly from fans had been around for some time. Kickstarter and Indiegogo had
both played host to some pretty significant creative success stories. Jack Conti's real innovation was to
note that, whilst these sites worked well for one-off projects like an album or film, most online
creators didn't work on that kind of staccato basis. They were constantly releasing stuff. So,
he wondered, what if you took that crowdfunding concept and rebuilt it around a monthly subscription
model? It's no exaggeration to say that Patreon was a pretty instant hit. Just weeks after uploading
that music video, Jack Conti had accumulated pledges of more than $5000. Far from finding it cheeky or
crass, fans seemed to be genuinely enthusiastic about helping to financially support the content they
loved. Unsurprisingly, as news of Conti's impressive sign-up stats began to spread, more and more
creators were tempted to try Patreon out. Three creators became six, which became 15, which became
50, which became 100, until, just after six months post-launch, Patreon was helping thousands of
creators fund their creative ambitions. Okay, so far, so heartwarming. The story of Patreon's founding
is undoubtedly a pretty charming one. Compare it to that of YouTube, which was dreamt up to make
it easier for its founders to find footage of Janet Jackson's famous Super Bowl wardrobe malfunction.
Or Facebook, which grew out of a website for college students to rank their peers based on perceived
hotness. Patreon's origins, by contrast, are just so wholesome. The fact that Jack Conti, who remains
Patreon's CEO to this day, is also a creator himself, lends a real sense of authenticity to the platform.
Now, there's no doubt in Conti's creative credentials, but it's worth recognising that Patreon is ultimately
a Silicon Valley startup founded by two Stanford graduates. And despite attempts to distance itself
from the metas and Googles of this world, it's often followed a pretty similar path to those less
well-loved companies. In fact, if we wanted to isolate an inciting incident for Patreon's present
crisis, it would lie in Jack Conti and his co-founder Sam Yam's decision just two months after Patreon went
live to negotiate $700,000 in investment from a venture capital firm named Freestyle Ventures.
For the uninitiated, venture capital, or VC funding, is a form of business financing,
popular amongst Silicon Valley startups. How it works is that a venture capital firm will provide
a startup with a chunk of money in return for an ownership stake in that company. In the ideal
scenario, the company will use that money to grow, at which stage they will solicit more VC money and
more and more until, when that company has proven itself a success, it will be floated on the stock
exchange, allowing the VC firms to sell their shares at a massive profit. Conti and Yam have
consistently and enthusiastically embraced this strategy. By the time Patreon was three months old,
it had raised $2.1 million in investment, primarily from venture capital firms. And this quickly became
something of a habit. Over the next eight years, they would raise a total of $410 million in this
way. Whether or not Patreon would have been able to revolutionise the creator economy in the way that it
has, without this kind of investment, remains an open question. There's no doubt that building the
company to the scale that it is today required some capital. But, at the same time, the company has
always managed to grow pretty organically. The beauty of the product is that the more creators that sign
up and start promoting their Patreon pages, the more other creators hear about it and sign up too.
Either way, Conti and Yam's decision to hand over so much equity to such single-mindedly
profit-oriented investors would eventually come to threaten many of their platform's founding ideals.
But before the fall, the rise. Because whatever Patreon's present failings, its successes are staggering.
In just a few short years, the model of subscription crowdfunding the platform is built upon
went from being completely unheard of to a central force in the creator economy. It wasn't a foregone
conclusion that Patreon would be the sole dominant player in this. Early on, it had several competitors.
The most notable of these was a site called Subable, which had been launched by Hank and John Green
just two months after Patreon and which worked on a very similar basis. It would take regular donations from
fans and distribute them to creators. The Green Brothers, however, took a much more cautious
approach to growth. For various reasons, Subable remained invite-only, with creators having to apply
to join. The benefit of this was that it allowed Subable to build a sense of prestige around its select
roster of popular YouTubers. The downside was that it allowed Patreon, which had enabled anyone to create a
profile from day one, to gather a momentum which Subable simply couldn't match. By the time Subable had
onboarded 24 creators, Patreon had over 10,000. The result was that Patreon was everywhere. Even the most
casual YouTube viewer or podcast listener had at least some idea of what it meant for a creator to have a Patreon page,
and what it meant to be a patron of someone. In fact, Patreon often felt less like a platform or
company than a cultural phenomenon. The platform's ultimate victory was secured in March 2015,
when Jack Conte announced that Patreon had bought Subable for an undisclosed amount. In doing so,
it had established an effective monopoly on subscription crowdfunding. Other competitors like
coffee limped on, but their relative footprint was pretty tiny. All of this was surely cause for
celebration among Patreon staff and investors. But its impact on creators would be mixed.
Patreon had changed the game and made vast swathes of creativity possible, which otherwise might have
simply been financially inviolable. Nevertheless, the lack of any meaningful competition placed many
creators' livelihoods entirely in its hands.
Okay, so I want to fast forward a bit here to January 2019 and show you this headline. It reads
Patreon CEO says the company's generous business model is not sustainable as it sees rapid growth.
This headline was the result of an interview that Jack Conte had given to CNBC, in which he'd claimed that
the company would need to make significant changes to its pricing structure if it was going to remain
profitable. This was an intriguing statement. At the time, Patreon was on top of the world,
with 128,000 creators using the site. In fact, according to that same article, Patreon was on track to
process $500 million in pledges that year. Given that, at the time, it took a flat 5% cut of all pledges
after processing fees, this would have given it a total revenue of $25 million after the cost of
processing payments had already been taken into account. Which, given that processing payments is the
main thing it does? Of course, few would bemoan Patreon making enough money to pay its staff
and turn a profit. But remember those venture capitalists from earlier? By 2019, Patreon had
raised $105 million in investment, much of it from VC firms. And venture capitalists are rarely content
with a bit of profit. The risky nature of their investments means that they need those which
are successful to be really successful. The industry rule of thumb is that a successful startup
should provide a return of 10 times the initial investment. Profitability for Patreon meant turning
that $100 million into $1 billion. Signs that this might impact Patreon's relationship with creators
first emerged as early as 2017, when the company posted this update to its official blog. The
update revealed plans to shift the burden of processing fees from creators to their fans. While
this would supposedly have saved creators some money on the backend, it involved supporters being charged
an additional 35 cents plus 2.9% in fees on top of every pledge. The backlash to this announcement was
brutal. Creators turned on Patreon, complaining that the fixed portion of the fee specifically
stood to disproportionately impact smaller backers, some of whom for which it meant a nearly 40%
price hike. More than this, it just seemed to go against the culture of the site, pushing creators
away from drumming up lots of smaller donations and towards soliciting fewer but much larger pledges.
After six days of creators threatening to leave the platform and fans cancelling pledges, the changes
were scrapped, with Jack Conte forced to personally apologise for the fumbled rollouts. But concern among
investors that Patreon was being too generous in setting its fees didn't go away. Two months after that
29 CNBC headline then, Patreon came back with a new proposal. Rather than hiking prices for fans,
it would instead increase the percentage it took from creators. Where the company had previously
claimed a flat 5% after processing fees, it would now offer multiple plans. A no-frills light plan
would continue to be charged at 5%. A so-called pro plan, which closely mirrored the previous offering,
would be charged at 8%. Finally, a premium plan aimed at larger creators would be charged at 12%.
These fee hikes were in many ways far more brazen than those which had been proposed previously.
Nevertheless, the company managed to avoid a mass exodus by grandfathering in existing creators on
what it called its founder plan, which remained at 5%. Obviously, there was still some risk that this new
pricing structure would deter new creators from joining the platform. But events were about to conspire to turn
any predictions about Patreon's future on their heads.
Alright, let's do this one last time. On the final day of 2019, the World Health Organization
received reports of 44 unexplained cases of pneumonia in Wuhan, China. By February,
the infection that caused those cases had a name, COVID-19. And, by March, cities, towns and villages
across the world had gone silent as quarantine and lockdown restrictions confined people to their homes.
These were bleak times. A lot of people were scared for both their health and their jobs.
But, at the same time, folks had a lot of time on their hands. Which meant two things for the creator
economy. First, a lot more people sat at home looking for stuff to watch, read or listen to. And,
second, a whole bunch of folks who now had the time to explore their own creative ambitions.
The result for Patreon was a huge influx of both creators and supporters.
Over the previous 12 months, Patreon's growth had been dwindling. But, in just the first three
weeks of March 2020, more than 30,000 creators joined the platform. Fans responded with almost a
million new pledges. The COVID-19 pandemic almost served as a second launch for Patreon. It led to
a whole new wave of creators discovering the site and benefiting from the unique relationship it enabled
them to develop with their fans. For some, it provided a crucial sliver of income during trying
economic times. For others, it provided a whole new career path. But, remember those venture capitalists
from earlier? In September 2020, Jack Conte uploaded another update to his YouTube channel.
This new round of investment pushed the company's valuation to $1.2 billion.
Then, less than a year later, Conte uploaded another video.
Patreon just raised a $150 million Series F round of financing at a $4 billion valuation.
That's right, Patreon was now supposedly worth $4 billion.
Suddenly, Jack Conte was everywhere again, hailed on podcasts and at conferences as the man who was
shepherding creators into a new era of prosperity.
This characterization was very much of his own creation. He repeatedly claimed that his company
being worth $4 billion was the sign of a coming second renaissance.
Back at Patreon itself, the exec team were preparing for world's domination. They poached a new chief
product officer from Instagram, who first fired a bunch of staff and then announced a massive hiring
push, which he predicted would see the company double in size by the end of the year. And then…
Well, the worst stage of the pandemic subsided. People were allowed to leave their houses and see
their friends again. That massive surge in creators and pledges turned out not to be the start of a new
era but the result of a very specific set of circumstances which had now passed.
And for a company which had now absorbed more than $400 million in investment…
That was going to be a problem.
Since the end of lockdown restrictions, Patreon's growth has slowed massively. For four of the five
years between 2016 and 2021, the total number of pledges processed through the platform had grown more
than 60% year on year. By the end of 2022, that number had dropped to just 7.5%.
Of course, in a sane world, this wouldn't necessarily be bad news. The platform at least
was still growing after all, just at a much lesser rate. Companies can't grow forever and this should be
okay. But remember those venture capitalists from earlier? That final set of VC firms had bought into
Patreon at a valuation of $4 billion. But stagnating growth quickly made that number look laughable.
In September 2022, Patreon's Senior Vice President Carlos Cabrera sent a memo to staff
revealing that Patreon's valuation had dropped a staggering 70%. The company swiftly laid off
17% of its workforce and closed whole offices in Dublin and Berlin. And here's where things get
worrying for Patreon creators and their fans. Because the VC firms which bought into Patreon
will still want growth and, if growth isn't likely to come from increasing the number of people using
the site, it's ultimately going to have to come from increasing the amount of money that Patreon
makes from the creators and fans who are already there. At this point, we need to return to those
reconfigured creator plans from 2019, which were born of a previous era of stagnation for Patreon.
Because, on reflection, they're kind of exploitative. See, when most businesses grow, they can usually
expect to benefit from what are called economies of scale. If you're an artist who wants to sell
t-shirts with your designs on them, it's generally much cheaper per unit to get 100 t-shirts printed
than it is to print 10. This means that the larger your business grows, the more profit that you're able
to keep per unit that you sell. Patreon's creator plans flip this on its head. The Lite plan has
since been discontinued, meaning that small to medium-sized creators are most likely to sign up
to the pro tier. This will see them charged an 8% platform fee on all pledges. But, if they grow to
have a sizeable number of supporters, then they might find it useful to have access to a Patreon partner
manager or multiple admin accounts for different members of their team. By signing up to the premium
plan, however, these creators not only end up paying more to Patreon through having more pledges for
Patreon to take a cut of, but also paying a higher commission per pledge. My point here isn't to
elicit a grand wave of sympathy for creators who are making huge sums through Patreon. Although,
I'm sure it's frustrating if you've got a team and bills to pay. I'm more interested in what this
tells us about Patreon's business model. Take a look at this graph, which I made using data from
Graftreon. It plots descending percentiles of the 222,126 creators who have at least one public
supporter on Patreon against the percentage of the total number of pledges which those percentiles receive.
As you can see, the distribution is so skewed that you can barely even see the plot.
If we crunch the numbers themselves, we find that, as of April 2023, more than 25% of public pledges
processed through Patreon went to just 556 creators. That's just 0.25% of the total creator pool.
More than 50% of pledges went to the top 1.75%. In fact, the bottom 80% of creators received just 10%
of all pledges. Now, none of this is Patreon's fault. Neither is it much of a surprise. Audiences have
always tended to agglomerate around a relatively small number of artists and creatives. But it does
explain that seemingly backward approach to the pricing of Patreon's creator plans.
Despite the impressive top-line figures which Jack Conte loves to quote about the total number
of creators using the site, Patreon is actually heavily reliant on just a few thousand top earners.
And there are signs that its business model going forward is likely to focus more and more on
extracting a larger chunk of cash from those creators. The blogger and author Cory Doctorow
likes to talk of what he calls the inshittification of online platforms.
Inshittification refers to a kind of mission creep which seems to affect all profit-oriented
platforms at some stage in time. It happened to Facebook, to Instagram and is currently happening to
Twitter too. In the broadest possible terms, inshittification describes the process through
which platforms pivot their attention away from providing a useful, reliable service for their
users and towards ensuring a strong return on investment for their shareholders. This usually takes
place through the introduction of a stream of new features which, rather than serving to improve the
offer which initially drew users to a site, instead exists solely to increase revenue.
This has certainly been in evidence at Patreon over the past few years, where a somewhat chaotic
drive to launch new features seems to have taken over. There's been Patreon Lens, a since-discontinued
attempt to mimic Snapchat's Stories feature. Merch for Memberships, a print-on-demand service which
allows creators to offer merchandise as perks for their supporters. Patreon Video, which enables creators
to upload videos directly to Patreon rather than embedding them from YouTube or Vimeo. Not forgetting
the more immediately controversial Patreon Capital, which reportedly allows larger creators to take out
loans from Patreon to be paid back through a garnishing of their future earnings. Since I've started
writing this video, Patreon's gone even further and announced the upcoming launch of what it's calling
the New Patreon. This appears to be an attempt to turn Patreon into a replacement for creators' websites
and mailing lists. It will add a new, free membership tier to all creators' pages in addition to a digital shop,
which will let creators sell individual videos, podcast episodes and more to fans who aren't
necessarily signed up as regular supporters. If all this seems a little chaotic, it apparently
reflects the company's culture behind the scenes. An article published in The Information earlier this year
due on interviews with over 20 current and former Patreon employees. And those interviewees painted a
less-than-flattering portrait of Jack Conte as an incompetent and terminally disorganised CEO who is
constantly jumping from one idea to the next in a manner which creates huge problems for the developers
tasked with bringing his ideas to life. Nevertheless, there are some commonalities between these features.
Firstly, whilst most are pitched as making life easier for creators, they actually serve to further
lock creators into Patreon's ecosystem. Patreon creators are already heavily reliant on Patreon itself.
Jack Conte likes to boast about the fact that creators have access to their supporters' email
addresses. But the reality is that for most creators, the sheer hassle of migrating to a new platform
would likely lead to a considerable loss in support. These new features take this even further. Patreon
previously prided itself on its interoperability, building or commissioning its own integrations for
Discord, WordPress, MailChimp and Vimeo. Features like Patreon Video and the new Patreon, however,
work to replicate these services within the platform itself. Now, this might be more convenient for some
creators. But it ultimately increases Patreon's hold over them. If Patreon can convince creators to
replace their websites and mailing lists with its own proprietary features, it can make it much,
much harder for them ever to move to a different platform. More important to the process of inshittification,
however, is the drive to increase revenue. And in addition to further tying creators to Patreon,
many of these features come with slightly sneaky additional charges. We've already discussed the manner in which
Patreon's current creator plans serve to extract proportionately higher fees from more successful
creators. And merch for memberships follows a similar strategy. Whilst its high costs per product might
be part of the course for print-on-demand services, the scheme also requires users to hand over an additional
3% of every single penny they make through the site, regardless of how many supporters actually
join tiers with merch attached. Further, whilst you might have thought that native video was a pretty
standard feature for an online platform in 2023, Patreon also plans to start charging extra for that
at the beginning of next year. As someone on the founder tier, all of this makes me a little suspicious
about whether the new Patreon might be used as an opportunity to bring longer-term creators over
onto the newer and more expensive creator plans too. Alongside unnecessary feature bloat and increased
charges, however, the ultimate consequence of inshittification is the degradation of the core
features which initially drew users to a platform. And Patreon's chaotic drive to build new revenue streams
certainly appears to have led to a failure to maintain or improve the site's existing core
functionality. That being the processing of regular payments from fans to creators. Because, for most
people, all of these extra features are entirely superfluous. As part of preparing for this video,
I ran an, albeit entirely unscientific, poll on my YouTube community tab which concluded that the
vast majority of Patreon supporters check the site monthly or less. As one user put it,
I don't care about Patreon updates. It's just a banking website to me. But with its attention elsewhere,
maintenance or development of this core functionality appears to have stalled.
In August 2023, Patreon had a nightmare of a day. Firstly, an update to the platform's payment
infrastructure caused a significant number of supporters to be billed from an address in Ireland
rather than, as had previously been the case, California. This led those supporters' banks and
credit card providers to reject those charges as fraudulent. If that wasn't bad enough, Patreon's
internal systems then recorded those users as having cancelled their pledges, leading some creators to
report massive losses in support. Worse still, on the very same day, a seemingly unrelated issue
led Patreon to block many creators from cashing out their earnings. See, Patreon requires creators
outside the US to use a service called Payoneer to retrieve the money they earn through the platform.
Payoneer has always been a pretty clunky service to use, with an opaque schedule for converting payouts
from US dollars into one's local currency. But a problem with how Patreon sends money to Payoneer
left some creators unable to withdraw their funds at all for over 48 hours.
For a lot of creators, either of these events happening would have been frustrating. For both
to have happened on the same day was terrifying. On the one hand, rejected payments were causing them to
lose supporters. Whilst, on the other, problems with Payoneer made the money from the transactions
which had gone through impossible to get hold of. Over on the platform formerly known as Twitter,
creators and their fans directed a justifiable amount of anger at Patreon. After a decade of convincing
creators that it can be trusted upon to administer a portion of their income, many surely felt that the
company should have built processes to ensure that either of these failures were impossible,
let alone both. In a manner which tracks perfectly with Cory Doctorow's in-shittification thesis,
it's hard not to come to the conclusion that all the time and effort Patreon has been spending
developing questionable new features to increase their revenue has caused them to neglect the key
service which made the site popular in the first place. Even if those features weren't so obviously
designed to extract more cash from creators, many users would still not care about them, continuing
to view Patreon solely as a regular digital tip jar. But if a desperate, chaotic drive to increase
revenue for investors leads that primary function to fail, then it's only likely to hasten the platform's
demise, not save it. At the end of the day, this is a question of priorities. Patreon has always
tried to set itself apart from other platforms, particularly using the fact that it was started
by a genuine creator to suggest that it always has creators' best interests at heart.
The Patreon PR team must have been over the moon when a 2021 interview with Jack Conte for The Verge
was headlined, Patreon CEO Jack Conte on why creators can't depend on platforms.
But the company's recent trajectory serves as a reminder that Patreon itself is a Silicon Valley
platform company. Which, partly as a result of loading itself up on venture capital money,
has found itself forced to engage in practices identical to those of other platform companies.
There may still be plenty of Patreon staff who care deeply about creators and creativity.
But, by desire or necessity, the company as a whole has come to treat them primarily as
vectors of revenue to be maximised. I hope, for the sake of creators who rely on it, that Patreon,
or something like it, can be salvaged. Because I love Patreon's core mission. Whilst my own income
through Patreon has always been fairly small, having some revenue which isn't tied to sponsorships
or viewership has allowed me to make much bigger risks in the topics that I cover than I otherwise
would have been able to. The demise of Patreon would certainly make for a much more boring online
landscape, with creators forced to work to lower budgets and be much more views-oriented in what they
make. I sincerely hope the platform manages to re-find its way. But whether that's possible in a
situation where the company is so beholden to investors remains to be seen.
In fact, it's the risks of relying on third-party platforms like Patreon or YouTube which motivated me
and a bunch of other creators to launch our premium streaming service, Nebula. Nebula is a creator-owned
platform in which we have a collective say over which features get developed. This enables us to
ensure that the platform continues to serve creators and our wonderful audiences rather than being bent
into weird shapes to suit the demands of venture capital investors. It also means we get to sponsor
our own videos, as is happening here, and work on cool exclusive content too. In fact, if you're anything
like me, you're a massive fan of Lindsay Ellis. And Lindsay's latest videos on The Lord of the Rings,
ET and Guy Fieri are exclusive to Nebula, with more to come in the near future. All three of these videos
are insightful and fun and perceptive in ways that only Lindsay is able to be. And they join a whole host
of other exclusive productions from Legal Eagle, Second Thought, Wendover Productions and many, many more.
In addition to this, Nebula subscribers now also get access to Nebula classes. This includes my class,
How to Research Like a PhD Student, in which over 16 lessons, I share my strategies for finding good
sources, for efficiently reading large amounts of material and for taking and organising notes which
will be useful for years to come. Whether you're a student, an aspiring creator or just interested in
how these videos come together, I think it's full of really useful advice for how to go about working
on a large-scale research project. Making videos at the scale that we do is pretty expensive. They
take huge amounts of time and kit and costume and software to bring together. So, if you want to
support us to keep making the best videos that we possibly can, then I would be so, so grateful if you'd
sign up to Nebula using my personal link go.nebula.tv.com. This will score you a full 40% off an annual
subscription, meaning that you can access all of that exclusive video goodness for just $2.50 a month.
Some of that money goes to fund even more exciting originals, while some of it comes directly back to
us to support our work. That link again is go.nebula.tv forward slash Tom Nicholas. I'll see you over on
Nebula, but now time for some thank yous. Thank you so, so much for watching this video. I hope that
it has been worthy of your time. It was a really interesting one to make and I hope that came across
in your watching of it. As ever, if you know of someone else you think might enjoy or get something
out of this one, then please do consider sharing it with them. I would be super grateful for that.
Now time to do some slightly ironic, maybe sheepish thank yous to the people who do support me over on
Patreon and who get access to early little bits of my videos as I'm working on them. Copies
of scripts, weekly updates on what I'm working on and much more. If you'd like to join those people,
you can find out how to do so at patreon.com forward slash Tom Nicholas. And if you sign up
to the top tier, you'll get your name read out as I'm about to do for Richard, for Alan Gann,
for Gary, Dickon Spain, Bill Mitchell, Zedsy Reese, Alexander Blank, Niels Bildgard,
Sofia R, Sergio Suarez, Nicolas Jacques Mart, Strange Weekend, Ricardo Fernandez de Cordoba,
Richard Rappoon, Amit Singh Parraha, Gabriel Koch, Demelza, Jimmy Dunn, Christopher Cowan, Fiasco
Linguini and Sarah Morgan. Thank you so much to all of you for being signed up to my Patreon
and I'll see all of you in the next video.
