Thank you very much for inviting me.
Okay, so this is a joint project with many co-authors.
It's Rinkin, Boreldo-Chen, Baerishman, Gates-Groey-Lin, Rosenblum.
It's a series of five papers, and co-authorship is complicated, so I'll say once and for all.
The whole project is joined with all these people, and somehow it's especially joined
with Gates-Groey-Lin on all the papers.
So the main theorem is what's called the geometric Langman's conjecture.
And so it says the following.
I guess maybe I'll do it for a second.
So I'm going to work with a field K of characteristic zero, and I'm going to fix X over K smooth projective curve.
I'm going to fix G, a reductive group, connected reductive with a dual group G-chunk.
And then the theorem says the following.
So there's the category of D modules on bungee.
And then there's, so bungee is the moduli stack of all G bundles on this curve.
So for instance, when the group is GM, this is roughly the Jacobian.
There's a stacky factor of BGM and the Z, parallelizing the degree, but it's essentially the Jacobian.
And in general, it's some kind of interesting space.
And then there's also the space of local systems for the Langman's dual group.
So when I say loxys right now, I mean in the DRAM sense.
So if I'm talking about GLN, there are vector bundles with connection, and I'm considering the moduli stack of those.
And the goal is to compare these two objects.
And unfortunately, they're not equivalent, but there are two things that one can say.
So the first is, there's a slight correction to this category, which is called int code NILP.
It's a slightly bigger object, and I don't kind of want to get into the definition right now.
And the first way to say this is that there's a geometric Langman's functor that's an equivalence between D modules on bungee and this int code NILP button.
It looks as G-check.
And the second way one can state this is that there's a quotient to call the category of tempered D modules.
And this is also going to have an equivalence I call tempered geometric Langman's between this quotient category and this category of quasi-coherent sheaves.
And this looks as G-check.
And this tempered thing, I don't want to say the definition.
Roughly for PgO2, I quotient by, well, precisely I quotient by sheaves with constant cohomology in this quotient operation, but in general it's something slightly technical to say.
And yeah, but that's the theorem.
And you should think that the assertion that this functor is an equivalence is as difficult as the assertion that this is an equivalence.
There's some theory that goes into that.
There's some theory that goes into proving that, but for practical purposes, you can think of them as roughly equivalent statements.
That's a great question.
So this functor has infinite amplitude.
This functor actually has finite amplitude.
So I do mean unbounded derived category.
And it's kind of essential in some sense on top.
And yeah, but there, let me comment for a moment that there's some variance that I don't quite want to say a lot about.
So maybe I'll just say very briefly.
So there's a Betty version of this theorem in which I work over the complex numbers.
And I consider sheaves with no potent singular support on Bungee.
And when I say sheaves here, for instance, when I talk about local systems, that would be a special case of a sheave with no potent singular support.
I allow infinite rank local systems.
So I really mean representations of Taiwan.
And that these are going to be equivalent to something of very similar nature.
So sorry.
The same end code NELP sort of game for the moduli space of Betty local systems.
And there's, again, this picture.
The temperate quotient.
And the space of quasi-coherent sheaves.
And actually, a nice phenomenon is that this functor down here is T exact.
So it preserves the T structures.
So it's this is actually an equivalence of a billion categories in the sense where this is given some quotient T structure.
And so in that setting, it's a question.
I would say in some sense, there's a question.
What do you mean by the geometric Langlands conjecture?
And right now there's like four things on the board that one could mean.
And I could write four more in a moment.
And it's all unramified.
It's all unramified.
Yeah.
So for practical purposes, you should think each of these statements is equivalent to any other.
It can move from one to the next.
And in this sense, you could think of.
So if you took this as your statement, you could give geometric Langlands as an equivalence of a billion categories.
When you say it's T exact for which T structure, I would say if no.
So here's the perverse T structure.
And then the statement is this.
This picks up a quotient T structure.
So that's not true on the left.
That's not true on the left.
Yeah.
Could you give some hint where the distinction comes?
So for like the group GM, this equivalence is some version of a Fourier-Mukai transform for a billion varieties.
And there's just kind of an experimental fact that cohomological shifts occur in that story.
So that's an equivalence that has amplitude equal to the dimension of the billion variety.
And so the...
How should I say?
Like this T exactness is kind of related to the fact that automorphic eigenchiefs are perverse, right?
Yes.
But you're saying somehow that's less true on the left.
Yes.
That's less true on the left.
So it's something about the kind of families that...
The way families work in the Betti setting versus the Durab setting.
So in some sense, you can have a family of D-modules or...
This is some kind of general feature of the Betti picture.
Okay.
It's related to the fact that...
Although not the same as the fact that this is much more like an affine scheme version.
So...
I would say that's the most elementary statement that...
Other questions?
Yeah.
I'm going to say some separate results.
So these are kind of like the categorical statements.
But I also want to formulate kind of what's known about Hecke-Agen-Sheaves.
So I'm just going...
There's a certain cohomological shift here I'm going to ignore, but...
So take...
Let me just say what's known about the structure of Hecke-Agen-Sheaves these days.
So take sigma to be an irreducible G-check.
I also want to formulate kind of what's known about Hecke-Agen-Sheaves.
So I'm just going...
There's a certain cohomological shift here I'm going to ignore, but...
So take...
Let me just say what's known about the structure of Hecke-Agen-Sheaves these days.
So take sigma to be an irreducible G-check local system, meaning it doesn't admit any
reduction to a proper parabolic.
And take F sigma in the category of D-modules on found G to this corresponding object.
To the delta sheath at sigma.
Under geometric-lang-lens.
Under the geometric-lang-lens.
So...
So then the following results are known.
So the first thing is that F sigma is regular Holomelbeck.
The second thing is that F sigma is perverse.
So that's...
I mean, follows from this two-exacunus statement, for instance.
The perverse I mean...
Reverse...
I mean, it's n-degree zero as a complex.
So it's n-degree zero.
So it's n-degree zero.
Perspective to the G structure.
Third thing is that F sigma is semi-simple as a perverse sheath.
Fourth thing is that actually F sigma, I can write down exactly what it is as a...
I can write down its Jordan-Holter series.
So it's going to be a direct sum of things I'll call F sigma rho, the dimension of rho.
Where here, rho is going to run over all...
Irreducible representations of the centralizer, S sigma...
S sigma...
S...
The group brought more in terms of sigma as a local system.
And maybe I'll just remind that...
S sigma mod, the center of the group, is always finite.
And this condition here, you should think of as somehow analogous to the phenomenon of all packets and the arithmetic theory.
And the fifth thing, which unfortunately at the moment I can only prove if the center of G is connected, is that the characteristic cycle of this F sigma is exactly...
S sigma's number one for the noquenum, so...
The noquenum con is the inverse image of...
S sigma...
S sigma...
S sigma...
S sigma...
S sigma...
S sigma...
S sigma...
S sigma...
S sigma...
S sigma...
I'm not going to say what it is in detail, but it's just to say that...
the characteristic cycle is known and given by some explicit formula.
So that's what we know in modern era. But that's what we know today about the
shape of these Meckayagian sheaves. So this tells you, for instance, like any perverse sheaf,
at the generic point of your stack, it's going to be a local system. And this tells you, for instance,
what the rank of that local system is. Okay, any questions before I go on?
Can you give an example of what is SIGMI and what it means?
So yeah, I mean, automorphism as a point in the stack. So if you think of SIGMA as a map from
PI1 of the curve to G-check, this is everything that centralizes the image. So if the group were GLN,
then this would just be a singleton seamlessly. But in general, what happens for general
reductive groups is it's . So for instance, if you take
the standard representation of the symmetric group on three letters, and you consider that as a
representation into PGL2, it has a slightly larger centralizer that has a ZMI2 centralizing it.
Other questions?
Great. So those are the main theorems. And so now what I want to do is somehow, and I guess I'm not
really going to talk about this stuff about the structure of Hecke-Agg and Sheaves, but one thing
that I think personally is slightly remarkable is it's related to a lot of the tools that we use in
setting this up. And also some of these theorems are—oh, I should have put attributions also. I'll
do that in a second. But the one thing that's slightly remarkable to me is that some of these
results are really proved using these equivalences of categories, which don't seem to tell you very
much at all about the nature of the questions that are occurring on the board. So that's just one kind
of comment that I at least like. So attributions. So this is from a joint series of papers with
Rankin, Gates, Grory, Tajdan, Rosenblum, myself, and Parshawski. I guess I'll make an item in any other order there.
And this is a joint project with Joachim Fehrishman. This is also due to that. This is
that plus geometric Langland's conjecture. And this theorem is something new, which is the person with Dennis.
Okay. Yeah. Oh, and actually this also, it was SGLC.
And we were able to prove these unconditionally when this group was trivial with MGLC.
So instead of authors, instead of authors, well, it's kind of, it's essentially unique. So
yeah, so here, this paper, this FR under...
Okay. Can I try to defer on this? So I think tomorrow, or either tomorrow or Wednesday,
paper, the first in our series of papers will occur on the archive. There's a section at the end that
says all of these results, and each of these has good references. So maybe just for the sake of time.
Okay. Other questions?
So what I want to do is say somehow overall
kind of the strategy of how we'll do this. So what I'm going to focus on is going to be kind of
this main theorem stating that there's this geometric Langland's equivalence. And I want to try to say,
I want to give some kind of overview of what we do in order to prove this theorem.
As best I can, time a lot of it. Also, there's a fact about this field, which is that, you know,
it's been going on for decades, and not everything's always percolated. So there's certain things
that you have to take on faith.
So, and it's my paper is being summarized in the hour.
So, so overall, the goal is the following. So the first thing we'll do is we'll construct this
vector Lg. The second thing we'll do is study structural features of this Lg.
And then the fourth thing we'll do is a bunch of tricks to deduce the theorem.
Maybe I can't explain all the tricks or sling my paper. Just the Inver trick.
Yeah, and I should say the random tricks somehow that occur here, you can imagine that there are
more conceptual things a person can do. We write about this in the beginning of our paper,
and it would be really great to have a better understanding of that part of the story.
So where in this thing will something like the construction of a Hecciag-in-Chief happen?
I guess in most constructions Lg.
Let me return to that question later. I'll tell you what the Hecciag-in-Chief is, but it's not a
super satisfying answer, which is part of why I find this. I mean, there's a formula for what the
Hecciag-in-Chief is, and it makes none of what I said clear. So.
Yeah, so now everything is in the Durham world. That's correct.
Okay, so the first thing I want to do is construct this functor Lg. And so I don't know if maybe this
isn't meaningful to this kind or something, but what I want to say is that this is, this can be
thought of as some kind of souped up version of circle theory. So I want to do something like what
happens in circle theory to construct this functor. So circle studied category O in combinatorial terms,
and the way that worked is that there was a certain particular object that was really important
called the big projective object. There's a second thing, which is that the category has kind of a,
in some sense, a big center. And then there's some homological algebra tricks that you do at the end
of the day, which are a little funny, and it'll be exactly the same progression here. So I'm going to
name a particular object for you, like the big projective. I'll say that there's somehow a big
center, some sense, and then we'll do homological algebra tricks. So the first thing I'm doing is
this construction of the functor. And so there's kind of a certain key functor, which is called
the functor of 1st or 0th, 1.0 Goetheker coefficient. And it goes from this category of D modules on
Bungee, the category of vector spaces. And so let me just say how it works.
So let me just assume my group is PGL2 for simplicity.
In general case, it's not very different. So there's BunG. There's going to be a kind of twisted
version of BunN and is the radical of the Borel. And my twisted version of the Borel,
I'm going to think of as parameterizing extensions. This.
So if I had O and O here, then zeroes. If I had O and O here, this would just be BunN,
but there's an omega twist. So put the omega in. This maps to H1 of omega one,
taking the class of an extension. Let me call this projection P. And of course, this is A1.
And by definition, the coefficient of a sheath F is going to be given as follows. So I take
the cohomology. So this just means complex of derom cohomology of the pullback of my sheath,
this BunN, twisted BunN, and then I'll tensor it with the pullback of the exponential sheath
along this character sign. And this is going to be hollowing from a certain object
of the puncture sheath, my F, where this puncture sheath is just rigged, so this formula is true,
so it's like phi upper star of this exponential, there's a choice to write something, and then do
this p-large tree. I'll go shift by plus or minus 2p. Minus 2, please. Okay. Ignore pull multiple shifts.
So this is some kind of basic object of study in the story. So it's analogous to this big
projective. This coefficient functor is analogous to Sergo's functor V in the sense.
The key thing that you should think is that, okay, first of all, if this is GM, then I'm taking the
skyscraper sheath at the origin inside of BunGM, which is some kind of, you think, Abelian group.
And what we're doing is some kind of Fourier theory. So this puncture sheath in general,
it's playing the role of kind of like the delta at zero in usual Fourier theory. So this is something
that you should think kind of a main part of our job is to prove that it's kind of like white noise.
It's a perfect superposition of all of the possible nodes. That's like a preview of something that
has happened here. Did I break something? Just do that? Okay.
What is this?
No, no, before the objector. Next one.
What's the next one? Here's what you do. You take your sheath F, you pull it back to the spun
n omega, then you also pull back the exponential D module, you tensor the two of them together,
and then you take cohomology. So C-Durham means the co-chain complex of Durham cohomology.
Okay, so that was the first thing. So it's like when you do Fourier theory, yeah, again,
there's a distinguished role played by the skyscraper sheath at the origin or by the delta
function at the origin, and this is the analogous object.
The second thing is going to be about symmetries of this category. So the statement is that in some
sense there's this category kind of has a large, it's not center, it's not the right word,
but it has a large collection of commuting endofunctors. So whenever you have a point x and x,
geometric Satake, I remind this is the curve, this gives rise to an action of rect g check on this
category of p module signed by the v and so there's a theorem
which I'm not going to state any more precisely when everyone makes me to.
So the assertion is that there exists a unique action called the spectral action.
Quarzy-co-loxis g-check acting on the C at Bungie
that is compatible with a souped-up version of the hack-a-action.
So souped-up version of the hack-a-action means I am I can allow x to vary
and I also allow multisense of points. So if you had two distinct points then you get hack-a-actions
at each of those points. So the hack-a-action the distinct points commute and somehow as you let one
point come down to the other point the action here and the action here sort of limits to the action of
the tensor product of two representations. And if you say a bunch of formal words to make that
very precise then what they prove is that there exists a unique action of
Quarzy-co-loxis g-check which is compatible in the natural sense with this hack-a-action.
Quarzy-co-loxis g-assemble-life
So you can think of this as
It means the following....
if you take I
Sorry. If you take a point in the curve side, so map you from local systems on x to local systems on, let me say, the formal neighborhood of the point, just for my own psychology, which is a copy of the classifying stack of this point.
So if you have an action like this, you could take a representation as a sheath here, form a vector bundle on loxist g-check, and then act on d by this action, and you get some undefunctor, and that should be my action.
And again, you should say these words with moving points and things, but yeah.
So this is kind of the statement. This is the statement of reciprocity, in some sense, in this world. So it's saying that the Hecke eigenvalues of
eigenchubes, for instance, are actually, well, the Hecke eigenvalues that you see in d of Bungee actually have to do with local systems for the Langland Stoll group.
And local systems always mean reducible local systems.
It does not always mean reducible, but this will be an important point, yeah.
It does not mean irreducible.
So when I talked about eigenchiefs, those were for irreducible local systems, but now it's arbitrary local systems.
Something remarkable is that our strategy uses reducible local systems to prove something about irreducible local systems.
Yeah, so now the theorem about the existence of the functor says the following.
So the first thing is that there exists a unique, so I'm going to kind of collect a few things and not all of them are really assertions, but first thing is that there exists this unique functor.
So this is the type of framework.
I'll call it all G-Camp.
It goes from the fnG.
Quasico, Luxys G-Camp.
That's linear.
So let's map of quasicoluxys to check module categories.
And that's normalized in the following way, so if you take this, well, maybe I'll be able to dive in a little bit nicer.
So what I want is that this, when you take D upon G, you map it via this functor, this tempered geometric lightness functor,
and then you map this down to vector spaces and global sections, this is supposed to be my functor taking the coefficients.
And so for people who know Whittaker coefficients, this records kind of two things for a number theorist.
So first, it encodes all of the Whittaker coefficients of an automorphic D module.
And it also kind of, the fact that it maps here kind of encodes the existence of reciprocity laws between those automorphic D modules.
And I want to say this A, it's a tautology from the theorem that they wrote, some very formal kind of thing.
So it didn't have anything to do with this being this functor.
It could have been any functor.
It didn't have anything to do with this being this category.
It could have been any category.
It didn't have to do with loxist g-check being anything.
It just had to be some nice stack that acted on your category.
So I'll just say this is all formal of the spectral action.
So the second thing is that this LG temp has finite amplitude, as we discussed before.
And then the third thing is that what are called compact objects.
So let me just say, I work with big categories with direct sums.
Maybe you work with small categories that don't have infinite direct sums.
And if you work with a small category, I would call that the category of compact objects.
And you and I, we can talk to each other.
I have more functors than you have by.
But we can go from my category to your category algorithmically in your category to my category.
So these compact objects are bounded below.
So this is a, so this is our compact objects in we have one G.
And these are bounded below.
So this is some very minor assertion that is only an assertion because of the non-quasi-compactness of by G.
And the last thing, which is maybe the most important points, but also it's formal from A, B, and C.
Sorry, C does not invoke the functor.
It does not invoke the functor.
That's correct.
D invokes the functor.
Yeah.
So I'm going to take the C at Bungie and form that same commutative diagram.
And the assertion is that they're this unique by fitting into the diagrams before.
Let me just, for brevity, I'm at least there.
So.
Good.
Right.
That's right.
On the LG term.
And this is such that,
whenever I find my functor LG to a compact object, this is bounded below.
So in other words, to tell you this functor LG, I just need to tell you what it does on compacts.
That's part of our language between big categories and small categories.
And let me tell you what it does.
Okay.
There's all of this intro.
Nope.
I didn't really say very much about it.
But the key thing to know about it is that the bounded below derived category of anything called int co is the same as the bounded below derived category of quasi co.
So they're just the same bounded below derived category.
But the unbounded places where interesting things happen.
So if I want to tell you LG of some compact object, which is all I have to do according to our, you know, treaty between big categories and small categories, I have to tell you where it maps as an object here.
But by C, that object was bounded below.
By B, it maps to something bounded below.
And so I'm just going to require that it map, like the bounded below category objects here are the same as the bounded below objects here.
So that just tells me where it had to go.
But you also have this new condition.
Is it also?
The same thing.
It doesn't matter.
Yeah.
I could have built the function to int co or int co.
Nope or anything.
For it to be an equivalence, it has to be the same code.
But the same construction would have worked without the null.
So this theory, it's a sense that produces a bunch of categories that interpolate and all have the same categories.
So there's something remarkable, which is like maybe I should have said before this Whitaker coefficient operation.
It's like taking a modular form to A1 of the modular form.
You can think of this factor somehow encoding all of the a n's of your modular form for n greater than or equal to one.
The failure of this to be an equivalence, for instance, is related to the fact that like there's a constant function that has vanishing a n's for n greater than or equal to one.
But what this is saying is that actually somehow categorically you can ignore it.
You don't need to worry about the fact that you missed the constant term of your modular form.
You actually can recover it from the non-constant terms by categorical magic, which is a nice thing.
So one of the key things is that Whitaker coefficients control almost everything.
And you can sort of build off of them in practice to get information about things that have actually vanishing Whitaker coefficients.
I think I understand what you mean by A1 for VL2.
But in Ayurag, there is the Borel with the radical of the unipotent radical.
Yes. Yes. And there's this n that goes in there.
Yeah.
So yeah, so that's what I would do in the skipsis.
That's something for a bunch of characters.
Oh, and yes.
We have a similar twist thing.
Yes.
For GLN, what is this omega?
Okay.
So let me say for B.
So I fixed the square root secretly this morning before I brushed my teeth.
And so bunn, you can think of it as B bundles whose induced T bundle is trivial.
So bunn and omega are B bundles whose induced T bundle is row check of omega.
Okay.
Two row check of the square root of omega.
And then I'm summing over simple roots.
So it will map to these spaces.
Sorry, Sam.
Can you give an example of where C fails for other stats?
Well, it's super general.
Yeah, it doesn't.
It doesn't really have to do with bungee.
Okay.
The thing it has to do with with bungee is like it's because of non quasi compactness.
It's not obvious that that bungee actually D modules on bungee is compactly generated.
It's a theorem of the gate score.
They give a general geometric mechanism.
The only example of a thing like that I really know is bungee.
And so, yeah, so the fact that it isn't an issue at all, it's sort of that bungee is a little bit of a weird space.
And this non quasi compactness of bungee and the way it's resolved is the way somehow many such problems are resolved.
It's something very, very general.
Other questions?
But the issue is the compacts are J lower streaks from some quasi compact open.
And you have to bound how bad that J lower streak can get on the left.
So that's the issue.
Okay.
So now let me say a little bit more kind of set up for the moment.
So that was the construction of the functor.
The next thing I want to do is say the following.
So let me be in the setting of this kind of tempered quotient.
Didn't quite say what it is, but I hope you'll excuse me for it.
Okay.
So there's this thing LG 10, but little things being vague about what the, or inconsistent about what the domain is.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay with this.
So this has a left adjoint, sorry, I drew the diagram the wrong way, which sends the structure sheath to this object I called before the Poincaré sheath.
And the adjunction still exists.
So this is the left adjoint and this is the right adjoint functor.
Both of these functors are linear.
And so, yeah, and I guess one of the key points is a theorem.
And maybe you won't like it, but the same there's no raskin from 22 paper.
And it says that this functor LG temp is conservative.
So it sends no non-zero objects to zero.
If you go to zero, if you somehow have all of your Fourier coefficients are zero, then you're zero up to this difference
between temperate and non-tempered things.
This was known previously for GLN, and I'll just say the proof for GLN uses the neurobiolic group.
In some sense, it's copy pasting the proof of multiplicity one for, or at least some version of this theorem, I should say, was known before for GLN.
And you should think that it's kind of copy pasting the proof of multiplicity one for automorphic forms for GLN.
And if you've thought about these things before, it's a non-trivial result for groups besides GLN.
And in some sense, this is kind of the theorem that got stuff started.
I think it's a...
In some sense, there's a nicer geometry going on there, but that's not what I'm going to explain today.
So what you need to show when you have the situation of a conservative functor that has an adjoint,
and that means that...
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to introduce an object I'm going to call AG,
which is the quasi-coherent sheep on the book says G-check.
It's going to be, by definition, this LG temp applies to the Poincaré sheath.
So you should think of it as encoding somehow the Fourier modes of this delta one of this Poincaré sheath.
So this is the definition.
It's actually an algebra just by general stuff about adjoint functors.
And what you're going to get for free from, you know, what's called the Barbeck theorem,
is that this D modules on Bungee temp is going to be equivalent to the category of modules over this AG.
So you should think this AG controls the multiplicities.
So our goal, in other words,
in other words, it's to show that the map from O on LOXIS, this AG, is an isomorphism.
So this is the unit map for the algebra structure.
And so everything reduces to understanding this AG,
a.k.a. the Fourier coefficients of the Poincaré sheath itself.
Does the fact that that categories modules from AG depend on what is conservative?
That just uses the conservativity, exactly.
Yeah.
So, yeah, so what you should think is, like, 2022, it was such a long time ago, members,
but, you know, that got, that got, you know, some part of proving that it's an equivalence off the ground,
and now all we worry about is the stuff after that.
So global sections of AG are, like, endomorphisms of the Poincaré sheath?
Yes, and that'll be relevant later.
That's correct.
And somehow, yeah, you could also kind of tensor by one of those vector bundles on LOXIS I said before,
and that'll have to do with other Fourier coefficients of the Poincaré sheath.
And in some sense, if you test enough of those, you know what this AG object is.
But, but, yeah, the other thing is if you take the fiber of AG at some local system sigma,
modules over that are HEKI game sheaths with that fixed local system as the eigenvalue.
So, okay, so now I'm going to start doing on Katz-Moody input.
So, this is used to prove structural futures and...
We just have certain...
You said, so if I'm worried, when I'm worried that I'm not getting every local system from a HEKI eigenchief,
that would correspond to the support of HE missing some points.
Correct.
Okay.
And if you were concerned that there were two HEKI eigenchiefs that would correspond to this AG sigma looking like two by two matrices.
Actually, or maybe better, it's like K times K.
Yeah.
So, and again, that will be super important in a bit.
So, this is used to prove, again, structural futures of...
So, maybe just very briefly for people who don't know.
So, there's something called the Katz-Moody algebra at critical level.
It was studied in the 80s by Fagan and Frankel.
And then Bailenson and Drenfeld used it to prove some nice theorems about HEKI eigenchiefs in the 90s.
And we're going to use kind of the same tool in order to study D modules on Bungie.
So, it's a way of producing certain nice D modules kind of by generators and relations that happen to interact very well with all the things we do in geometric language.
And almost everything is obtained by Katz-Moody localization.
And so, this is a great pool.
So, I'm going to write down kind of this first kind of commutative diagram.
So, there's going to be this Katz-Moody state category.
So, there's a theorem that we're using in order to do this.
There's this Katz-Moody state category.
It's going to be equivalent to this info of what are called monodrome-free authors on a formal disk.
This is the functor of Katz-Moody localization that I just mentioned.
Yeah, this is called .
This is my .
This is my .
And this is going to be this category of .
And this is some kind of .
So, you can think of it as an analog for G-check and local systems of the construction of .
.
This is a great question.
Yeah.
So, first, it's kind of similar to before.
So, first, I interpret this diagram with the point chosen.
And then, I interpret that the thing is making sense for a moving point.
And this will be a category that allows moving points.
So, for instance, objects supported as a point, but also such objects censored by a G-module.
I also allow multipoints here.
And then, I interpret the theorems in that sense.
So, kind of properly, these are factorization categories.
What is FLE then?
Fundamental local equivalence.
So, it's just notation for this.
But, there's some general yoga of what's called quantum geometric Langlands.
And this kind of thing is supposed to deform at all levels.
Or, it's proved these days to deform to almost .
Is this an old result?
Or, what's needed for you is?
So, the version at a point, like in the question, was known in 2005 or 2006, 2007,
due to Frankel and Gates-Gory.
And the upgraded version that allows the moving points, it's, I mean, it's sort of a key part of a long paper that we just put online.
So, it's one part of it.
So, there's, you should think there are additional technical complications that come up, which are, like, non-trivial to get over.
But, kind of, the tools, the kind of categorical tools that have developed over the last 10 years or something, like, you handle this without too much additional .
And we do really, somehow, do need the version with moving points.
But, that's the answer.
So, basically, you should think there's some representation theory that goes in here.
It's older kinds of stuff.
And then we give a souped-up version of this kind of monolanguage that has additional technical things, but it's not for the person just trying to learn what the stuff,
kind of how the stuff works, I would say, learn the point-wise version.
Don't worry about the moving points version of approximation.
So, this is the type of thing.
So, what this says is we can localize D modules.
We can form, start with these Katz-Moody representations at critical level.
We can form D modules on Bungie out of them.
What do those look like?
One example is the sheaf of differential operators.
Another is their, sort of, favorite vector bundles on Bungie.
So, if you take a point in Bungie, a point in the curve, we get a map from Bungie to, like, BG.
So, you can take a representation of G, and then turn that into a quasi, into a vector bundle on Bungie, and induce that up to a D module.
So, that would be another kind of example.
Basically, everything like this is moving points versions of that example.
And what we're saying is that you can compute the Whitaker coefficients of those localized D modules in some kind of G-check terms, some local terms, if you want.
Namely, you apply this FLE, and then you do, which is a kind of local version of this LG temp, and then you do this local to global procedure.
And the proof of the theorem, it's a mix of things, but roughly speaking, the proof is chiral algebra theory plus FLE.
And it's long, essentially, because the paper about this is long, only for the reason that what we needed from chiral algebra theory wasn't well documented.
That's not what supplies essentially large class of objects.
That you can compute things on, that's exactly correct.
Yeah.
So, the first application of that.
Okay, great.
So, the first application of this says the following.
So, it's the Eisenstein compatibility.
So, this is one.
And it says the following.
So, if you take D modules on Bun G.
So, I'm going to choose.
I have similar data for the dual group.
So, I can take D modules on Bun G.
I can map it to Bun M by what we call the constant term functor.
That's pull back to Bun P, push forward to Bun M.
And now this, you can map by LG to this thing to code NOPE.
This is going to be what we call the spectral constant term.
It's the same construction, just with these spaces of local systems, and G check, P check, and M check.
And this will produce actually objects of.
I will get to produce objects here.
This is going to be, oops, O M.
And the assertion is that this diagram can use.
And here's the idea of the proof.
So, we calculate everything on Katz-Mudy localized objects.
So, you take a Katz-Mudy localized object in D of Bun G.
That gives you a formula for computing LG of it in some kind of local terms.
And then we compute constant terms of that.
And that turns out, by the same mechanism as in here, that turns out to have a local expression.
So, what that means is you start with your representation in KLG.
You do some stuff to it, but somehow it's working purely locally on the curve.
And then you do some globalization procedure.
Can you tell me what is this bottom line?
Yes, it's pull back to LOCSIS P check, and then push forward to LOCSIS M check.
Sorry, why do you write that map from P to G surjective?
That's pretty good. Oops, that's a good example.
Yeah.
So, roughly speaking, the idea is we calculate everything in sight on these Katz-Mudy localized
guys.
And that gives it to you.
And let me just say kind of for us what that means.
So, you can apply induction to assume that you know geometric Langlands for every levy besides G itself.
And so, what that's going to tell us is that this map I was talking about before,
from O to AG, that this is an isomorphism on the locus of reducible local systems.
I feel like I have to put reducible, whereas you think it's reduced there.
Yeah.
Did you mean some bullfuck is an isomorphism?
Yeah, I mean that the restriction, yeah, exactly.
That the restriction to locus is reducible is an isomorphism.
Or you could say the formal neighborhood of locus is reducible.
Oh.
So.
Both?
Both, it's kind of the restriction functions conservative from formal neighborhood.
But, for me, things on the formal neighborhood, like torsion trees.
So it's spook, not spec.
So, the second application says that if you have an irreducible local system.
So this is what we call the ambinexterity, which will be for, it's a weird name, but.
So if you fix some irreducible local system, so the irreducibility is kind of important here.
It's definitely important.
So, ag irreducible, I mean the restriction of ag to, actually, no, let's put ag sigma, do it.
But this ag sigma has a perfect pairing with homology.
So it's, I'm doing my C like before, but this just means homology of slightly weird space.
And again, it has to do with these operas that people aren't necessarily know unless they do know.
So it's going to be all operas on X monodromy-free on this sigma.
So these monodromy-free operas, maybe I'll just say the nature of it.
Well, for GLN, for instance, this is like, I fixed a cyclic vector at the generic point of my curve in sigma.
It's a vector bundle of connection.
So it's a cyclic vector at the generic point.
And we prove that there exists a perfect pairing.
And this is somehow a perfect pairing between an algebra and a co-algebra.
And so this implies lots of great stuff for us.
Yeah, I guess we prove that.
And we also prove something else, which is more related to this ambidexterity, which is that this, as a vector space, is actually self-dual.
So two kind of related statements.
And why they're related, that might not be totally obvious.
But for us, the upshot is going to be the following.
So if you think about homology of a space as a co-algebra, well, it's like it's just a dual to co-homology, which is commutative.
Co-homology is also in degrees greater than or equal to zero.
So the only way it can be self-dual is if it's purely in degrees zero.
And so that's going to imply that this AG, like somehow over the irreducible locus,
that this is commutative, what's called, well, let's say, .
Over O, in fact, finite .
The structure sheifer, .
And the reason it's a tall is because the fibers are reduced.
All of its fibers look like homology of some space.
In fact, it's H0, that space.
That's the only thing that this allows it to be.
So, yeah.
So you have finiteness?
Because it's self-dual.
Otherwise, you'll get into trouble as a complex.
So I really want it as AG is isomorphic to, like, I should have said it better with moving points.
So AG irreducible is isomorphic to the atomic pool.
So it's not just a level of points.
And it's essentially the same idea.
So except this functor is almost surjective.
And what you can say is that it's really surjective onto the cuspital category.
And so then you could just try to take this puncture and see what is it like.
How do you compute its image under this equivalence?
And what you'll see is, like, you write it as localization of something.
In fact, the functor has an adjoint then.
So you know what to write this localization of.
You compute it using this diagram and you get this answer.
So that's a short explanation of what's happening.
But that's the idea of the calculation.
And that's why operas are coming into this story.
So one upshot is that if you know the contractibility of the space of operas structures on your irreducible sigma, then you know geometric language.
So an equivalent assertion after this point.
And so now I'm going to do some kind of tricks.
So this is the last bit of the talk.
So the tricks are the following.
So first, I'm going to make some assumptions.
So the genus is going to be at least two.
I'm going to assume that my G is an adjoint group.
And I'm going to assume that I'm not in the specific case of PGL2 and U2.
For me, that's one of my favorite features.
But this particular argument doesn't work in that case.
So low genus cases we treat by different means.
So let me just say, for instance, just if your group was PGLN, I said an opera structure is a cyclic vector at the generic point.
So you can think a cyclic vector for an irreducible local system.
That's just another name for a vector.
And so it's just essentially a line in the vector bundle restricted to its generic point.
So it's some kind of huge, infinite dimensional projective space.
And those are...
Sorry, I should say it's the vector space minus zero.
It's a huge, huge space.
And so that's injectable.
So that lets you do PGLs very directly.
And genus one and zero.
So again, what we have is this kind of multiplicity problem.
So we now have this AG.
We think about fiber and an irreducible local system.
That's going to be some basically product of copies of K.
I assume K is algebraically closed.
And I'm trying to show that there's only one K that occurs.
There's not zero.
There's not seven.
There's exactly one.
And so this is going to be something that kind of integrates over the whole moduli space of local systems.
And input is a very simple calculation.
It shows that the global sections of this AG.
So actually, I did the exercise before.
So this endomorphisms of this pulper a sheath.
And you can see that under these assumptions that the genus is at least two and the group is adjoints.
This is irrelevant.
But these are just scalars.
So the way this is going to work is that we have this funn omega my T.
There's going to be an open where the character is non-zero.
And this is going to match upon G.
And so this is going to be locally closed under the assumption that, oh, I should say, okay, first of all, the bulk ratio will be obtained by first star extending and then shriek pushing forward.
So here I extend and then I shriek push forward.
So this is some kind of general population with exponential sheaves.
Very logical.
And then what you're going to do is you're going to take this locally.
So this is locally closed when she is adjoint and the genus is at least two.
So that push forward is fully faithful.
This is certainly a fully faithful push forward.
And this guy is essentially an affine space.
In fact, it's like a, it's like a, you don't put a German replant.
Okay.
So it's great.
Nothing to do with.
And that's using the.
So the idea is that this is telling me, this is somehow rolling out that the multiplicities are too big or too small.
So it's some kind of key input.
It says that these global sections of AG, they're just scalars.
One comment is that therefore what I'm doing, it's very particular to the DRAM setting.
So there was this Katz-Moody localization and in some sense, that's very DRAM-y.
Of course, it's extremely DRAM-y, but it's not as DRAM-y as this in my mind, because I'm going to use the fact that these endomorphisms are very small, which corresponds to the fact that these endomorphisms are very small.
which corresponds to the fact that there are very few functions on the, very few algebraic functions on the moduli stack of G-check local systems.
And this kind of statement, it's just not true.
And for instance, the Betti setting.
Those endomorphisms are quite large for the analog of the Bunker A-sheave.
Okay.
So that's my main thing.
So first we prove a, probably this was known, but I don't know anything.
So we proved that under these assumptions, and now it really matters that the genus is not 2 and the group PGL2, but this is simply connected.
And so therefore, this AG irreducible is just going to be O on this locus cis, direct sum, sum n minus n times.
That's just what simple connectivity gives you.
And my goal is to show that n is equal to 1.
Because let me just remind, like, I'm supposed to show a particular map as an isomorphism, but it's a map of algebras.
And if you think about the fibers at every point, like, if you know the fibers are one-dimensional, map of one-dimensional algorithms is an isomorphism.
Everything's uniform.
So I need to show that this global sections is, sorry, I need to show that this n is equal to 1.
So the next thing that we show is that actually, if you take the derived global sections of this AG, and then you take the not derived version.
So we just said this is just scalars, so I don't really need to write H0, but...
I'm confused.
Yeah.
AG not just a cross-variant sheath?
I mean, algebraic?
Yeah.
Yeah.
But so why this being simply connected implies it's free?
So it was because of this ambidexterity I said before.
So I said it's commutative and finite at all.
Oh, sure.
Yes.
Okay.
Yeah.
Sorry.
No, no, I didn't say that very clearly.
So the assertion is that this AG irreducible, it actually has the same global sections at the not derived level as stages.
I emphasize this as scalars.
And here the idea is that we have the following kind of exact triangle.
So it's J lower star of this AG irreducible.
And then here you're going to have some kind of local chronology of AG, which is, I read it as I hat upper shriek.
No reasons.
But this, and I is the embedding of reducible local systems.
But this object, we know what it is.
It's going to be the same as I upper shriek of O.
And this is going to be in degrees greater than or equal to two.
The idea being that these reducible local systems.
So I have a trick of O.
We're on some, we have some LCI stack essentially in this setting.
So that's some kind of known feature.
For this I upper shriek of O, it's up to twist by line bundles.
It's the same as I upper shriek of, well, and shifts.
It's the same as I upper shriek of Omega.
So you can just compute very explicitly what it is.
And it'll be really in degrees greater than or equal to, I should say, the co-dimension
of, sorry, reducible local systems, which we show is greater than or equal to two, again,
under our funny assumptions.
And once you know that, then for free you get this assertion.
above.
But now the idea is, well, I guess this will just repeat what I just put it.
So K is this H0 of global sections of AG, made by what we said before, which is global sections.
What is it?
We wrote this I upper shriek of HG to the I upper shriek of O.
Is this this induction?
This is the induction.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So this is the same as the reducible version.
This is the same as H0 of global sections of O direct sum N times.
And this has dimension greater than or equal to N.
And so we see that N has to be one.
That is the argument.
But then, yeah, there's low genus cases.
There's the center.
There's all this stuff to worry about.
But that's the main thing.
So, yeah.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Any questions for the speakers?
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much!
Yes, but so what they do is somehow it's very generic on this basis of vocal system. So,
I mean, I guess there's a simpler question. So what Bezerkovnikov and Braverman do is
another thing which is known as, for instance, for GM, the cotangent bundle of, like, you can think
about D modules on Bungee as something like quasi-coherent sheaves on the cotangent bundle of
Bungee, and you can think about log-sys for G-check as having to do with kind of Higgs bundles for G-check,
so the cotangent bundle of Bungee-check, and there's a kind of old question that's out there,
quasi-coherent sheaves on these two spaces related to each other in some way,
and what Braverman and Bezerkovnikov do is they say in characteristic P, D modules, well,
there are known results towards this, so generically over the Hitchin base, this is a theorem of
Tanagian-Pantev. For GM, it's just absolutely true on the nose, and there's a question which is like,
how true is it as you specialize into the Hitchin base? I have no opinion about this,
but Bezerkovnikov and Braverman say that, in fact, D modules in characteristic P aren't so different from
sheets on these cotangent bundles. They're very, very close to the same thing, and they prove a
version of that theorem, again, very generically on the Hitchin base, and so for me, it's just,
yeah, so our theorem, you know, I mean, it's something, it's a nice problem for someone to do,
which is like, how compatible is this with, for instance, the Janagian-Pantev story? I'm not
especially worried about that, which is something that makes sense purely in characteristic zero,
and characteristic P, and sometimes they'll just be building on the same idea, I think.
Yeah, there's also an interesting story where it's not like she's in characteristic P, but
maybe that's for another time.
So you calculated the characteristic cycle of F-Sigma, and you said F-Sigma the sum of F-Sigma
and Rho. Can you calculate the characteristic cycle of F-Sigma and Rho?
I don't, yeah, I don't know what to, I definitely, I definitely can't, and I don't even know what a
good answer to that might look like. So if the centralizer, I mean, if the centralizer is trivial,
then this decomposition I wrote is just in terms of the connected parts.
Any other questions?
Okay, if no questions, let's thank the speaker again.
