What is the Donald Trump doctrine?
What is Donald Trump's foreign policy?
I think the place to begin to try to untangle what we've actually seen here
is to listen to the way Donald Trump and Vice President Vance speak about our allies.
The threat that I worry the most about vis-a-vis Europe is not Russia, it's not China,
it's not any other external actor.
And what I worry about is the threat from within.
The retreat of Europe from some of its most fundamental values,
values shared with the United States of America.
I mean, look, let's be honest.
The European Union was formed in order to screw the United States.
That's the purpose of it.
And they've done a good job of it, but now I'm president.
I've had very good talks with Putin, and I've had not such good talks with Ukraine.
They don't have any cards, but they play it tough.
Something is new here.
This is not even what Donald Trump's first term was like.
There were hints of it.
But something is new here.
I wanted to have a bigger picture conversation about what this Trump doctrine is
and the way it's going to reshape the world.
So I'm joined today by Fareed Zakaria, the host of GPS and CNN,
a Washington Post columnist, and the author of the bestselling book Age of Revolutions.
As always, my email, Ezra Klein Show at NYTimes.com.
Fareed Zakaria, welcome back to the show.
Always a pleasure, Ezra.
So to the extent you feel you can define it, what's the Trump doctrine?
You know, the part of the problem with Trump is he's so mercurial.
He's so idiosyncratic that just when you think you've figured out the Trump doctrine,
he goes and says something that kind of sounds like the opposite of the Trump doctrine.
But I do think that there's one coherent worldview that Trump seems to espouse and has espoused for a long time.
The first ad he took out when he was a real estate developer, I think it was in 1985,
was an ad about how Japan was ripping us off economically and Europe was ripping us off by free riding on security.
And what that represents, I think, fundamentally is a kind of rejection of the open international system
that the United States and Europe has built over the last eight decades.
If you think about it for a minute, it really is a remarkable achievement.
You go back to international relations before 1945, and it's just constant war, mercantilism, protectionism.
The two Yale scholars who tabulate in the 100 years before World War II,
there's about 150 territorial conquests, you know, aggression, taking of territory, legitimization of that term.
Since 1945, there have been practically none.
You have an open international economy.
You have free trade.
You have rules.
You have trade and travel and, you know, patents.
I mean, there's a huge area of kind of international cooperation that people don't think about,
but that happens all the time, every day, you know, when you fly, when goods go from one place to another.
And what Trump, I think, has taken from that whole world is the U.S. has been the sucker.
The U.S. has been the country that's had to underwrite it.
The U.S. is the country that's opened itself up to the world, and everyone takes advantage of the U.S.
So I don't know that he wants to tear it down, but he wants to seriously renegotiate or perhaps even redo that system.
Let me try to reflect what his people tell me, picking up on something you said.
There is this, as people call it, rules-based international order.
And the thing that Joe Biden says and Jake Sullivan says and Fareed Zakaria says is that America benefits from that order
and benefits from being part of that order.
And there's long been a critique from the left that America, in fact, dominates that order and doesn't play by its rules.
We break international law.
We do the things we want to do and then use those rules on others when we don't like what they're doing.
But the critique from Trump is that that's not true, that of every country, America, as the strongest, is harmed the most by these restraints, by these rules, by these laws.
Because we have so much leverage we could be using.
We could stop tariffs on anybody for any reason and get them to do what we want.
We have the strongest military of all the militaries.
Everybody wants to be on our side and everybody fears being on our bad side.
And that what Trump is doing is systematically searching out the strength America has, the ways we can wield our weight and leverage, and untying our hands from behind our back.
Yeah, there is a certain truth to that, that the United States does have enormous power.
By the way, they're even right about the fact that the United States is more open to, for example, the world's goods and services than they are to ours.
The United States has long practiced a kind of asymmetrical free trade.
So after World War II, we decided we would open up our markets to Europe and East Asia, to Japan and South Korea.
And the reason we did that was we were trying to build an international system where everyone benefited, where there really wasn't that feeling of beggar thy neighbor, zero-sum game, where everyone went into a competitive spiral, which then ends up in nationalism and war.
We were trying to build something different.
And we thought, you know, we can be a little generous here.
Let's let everyone grow and we'll do fine in the process.
And of course, Europe and Japan and South Korea and places like that grew.
But the United States absolutely dominated the world, you know, because it's a classic positive-sum game.
We created a much larger global economy, much larger trading system, huge capital flows.
And we were at the center of it.
The dollar was the reserve currency of the world, which alone gives us incredible advantages.
You know, we're the only country that doesn't have to worry that much about, you know, debt and deficits because we know that at the end of the day, the dollar is the reserve currency.
And my feeling is, if you take that system and say, okay, we're going to look at each bilateral relationship and see if we can squeeze this country for a slightly better deal, you probably will get a better deal.
But two things will happen.
The first thing is you will end up fracturing your alliances because the people with whom you have the most leverage are your allies.
You know, we have more leverage with Canada than we have with Russia because Canada depends on us for security.
Canada trades with us a lot.
Its economy is intricately tied to the U.S. economy.
So you can bully Canada.
You can't really bully Russia that much because we don't do much trade with them.
You can't bully China.
Even China, it's another vast continental economy that can survive just fine.
So the result of Trump inaction, the Trump doctrine inaction, has been a war on America's allies.
But the second more important part is, yeah, you'll gain a little bit here and there by getting slightly better tariff deals.
And just so people understand, tariffs in the industrialized world are around 3%.
They're very, very low.
So the idea, you know, we're not getting penalized in any large ways.
You can pick a few, you can cherry pick a few examples to the contrary, but mostly among the liberal democratic states of the world, it's a free trade world.
But what you will do by squeezing each of these individual countries, humiliating them, making them, forcing them to accept renegotiation of terms,
you lose the kind of relationships that you had built over eight decades that created this extraordinary anchor of stability in the world, which was the Western Alliance.
And, you know, the gains are not that great.
Let's talk about the tariffs for a minute.
This is one of the places where the policy and practices just seemed incoherent to me.
And I think I need to do a whole episode on this, but there were different goals that have been articulated for tariffs.
One is you impose significant steady tariffs for a long period of time because you're trying to make manufacturers make different decisions about where to locate factories, right?
You're trying to onshore supply chains.
To do that, you have to have these corporations expecting tariffs for quite a while, and then you hope that they will respond to those tariffs by insourcing into America.
Another is that we're going to use the tariffs to raise a lot of revenue.
That, too, requires the imposition over a long period of time of significant tariffs.
Another is we're just going to bully small nations and just bully kind of anybody we might feel like bullying, right?
The tariffs are an all-purpose tool to get other countries to do anything we want them to do.
We've sort of been using them that way, but not for very significant concessions.
We're on the cusp of maybe they're about to reintroduce them to Canada and Mexico, so we'll see where we are in a couple of weeks.
But what are they doing, man?
So there are two things, I think, going on.
One is, as I've said, Trump, if he has a worldview, he's a protectionist.
He's always felt that, you know, you want to protect American industries.
These foreigners come in and they take advantage of us, et cetera, et cetera.
The second, I think, is that—and this I think he discovered as president—the president has incredible power in the area of tariffs.
Technically, it's meant to be Congress that imposes tariffs.
But long ago, Congress delegated that power to the president.
And I think Trump loves that.
It is an extraordinary unilateral exercise of huge American power, the power of the American market, to say, I will just block you from being able to participate in the American market.
And you saw him do that in the case of the Colombian president.
So I think, you know, he's not sure.
At one hand, he loves wielding this weapon.
On the other hand, he is something of a protectionist.
But as you say, he notices that markets don't seem to like it.
So where will it all end up?
But my gut is that what happens is, you know, so tariffs in the industrialized world, as I said, have roughly been about 3 percent.
If you assume all of Trump's tariffs are actually put in place, I think it goes up to about 6 percent.
And if that stays, which is a big if, other countries will all retaliate.
This is an area where I think, you know, we do live in a—it's not even a bipolar world, it's a tripolar world.
The Europeans and the Chinese are very powerful.
And the Europeans on this issue speak with one voice.
So they will put on reciprocal tariffs.
The Chinese will put on reciprocal tariffs.
We end up in a world with more tariffs, more protection.
Look, I'm an old-fashioned free trader.
I think the whole thing is a disaster.
I think that this—it is a complete misreading of the last 30 or 40 years of economics.
J.E. Vance, when he was in Germany, in Europe, one of the few backhanded compliments he played to Germany was,
he said, at least the Germans didn't go along with this Washington consensus nonsense and they protected their manufacturing, which is partly true.
They didn't protect it through tariffs, by the way.
They protected it by just having very strong apprenticeship programs and what we would call, you know, community college-type stuff.
But look at where Germany is.
Germany, the third, fourth-largest economy in the world, is stuck in the second industrial revolution.
What do they make? Cars, chemicals, machine tools.
They don't have any industry in the digital economy.
The entire digital economy is totally dominated by the U.S.
Why is that?
Because we allowed ourselves to transition to where the frontiers of the economy were.
This whole idea of trying to hold on to, you know, the 19th century or the 1920s, it doesn't work.
It's incredibly expensive.
Nobody has been able to do it.
Manufacturing employment today, after Donald Trump's four years and Joe Biden's four years, is the same as it was roughly 10, 15 years ago.
I think that this whole obsession is fundamentally misconceived.
What we should do is much more redistribution so that the people who lose out in these periods of technological change are taken care of.
But the idea that we can go back to 1950 is just nuts.
This gets to me.
What are the real obfuscations of the Trump presidency, of MAGA as a movement?
There are a lot of conversations right now that have a term in them that is ill-defined, let's call it.
Efficiency, right?
Efficiency, right?
What is the Department of Government efficiency about?
What is efficiency?
Efficiency of what?
Towards what?
Right?
Efficiency requires some other defined ends to be a coherent goal.
But here, too, what is America first?
What would it mean for that to be successful?
What are we looking at?
Like, the trade deficit is going to be the main output of our foreign policy, which, by the way, he's not consistent on in any way.
He was talking the other day about building a renewed Keystone XL pipeline to Canada, which, if we start importing a bunch of Canadian oil, that's going to increase the trade deficit with Canada.
Is it manufacturing employment?
Is that what we're supposed to be targeting here?
If America first was working, it would be manufacturing and playing?
Is it GDP growth?
I have never heard them, and I have listened fairly closely, describe what this new era, this new golden age of American strength is.
Is it median wages for men?
They don't, I think, they still have not articulated a coherent view of American power success.
Like, is America stronger if AFD takes over Germany?
Why?
Like, what does AFD get us?
I'm curious how you think about this.
If maybe I'm being unfair, maybe you think there's a better definition of it, but there is a question in all this of what they're trying to achieve.
Do you feel like you know?
I would guess that America first for Trump and for many of his followers, and again, I wouldn't put, you know, some of the ideologists of MAGA in the same category.
But I think for Trump, it's the idea that the United States has been constrained for too long by globalism, by worrying about the international environment, by worrying about all these alliances constrained by these international organizations.
That, again, we've been the sucker.
That what America first means is we're going to break through all that bullshit, and we're just going to do what's good for America.
But what is left undefined, as you're saying, is, well, what is good for America?
Why would it be good for America to break, you know, to break apart the international trading system?
Why would it be good for America to break apart this world it's created?
So that part, I think, is undefined.
But you can see the impulse and what the attraction is to a lot of people.
You know, a lot of people who have always felt that the United States, by the way, run by this elite cabal of urban, you know, liberals, overeducated urban liberals in places like New York and Washington, has been selling America out.
This was basically, if you think of the 1950s, this was the McCarthy attack in many ways.
So I think in some ways it's a hearkening back to that idea.
There's another piece of that being restrained by norms.
I think a pretty significant difference between Trump's first term and his second is the intensity of his fascination now with territorial expansion, making Canada the 51st state, making Gaza a province somehow of America, taking over Greenland.
But I think Trump believes in the people around him believe that the norms of the world turned against territorial expansion in a way that was bad for America.
America in the 19th century expanded.
Other countries did, too.
And we are powerful.
And there are things we should want, that Canada should be the 51st state, or at least it should act like a vassal state of America, that if we want Greenland, we should have it.
I think Trump really wants, fundamentally wants, the land mass of America to be larger when he leaves office than when he came in.
How have you taken Trump's renewed interest in gaining territory?
Yeah, I think you have it exactly right.
And in a way, he has a kind of fascination, not just with America, I think, in the 19th century, in the way, exactly the way you described, but also in kind of geopolitics of the 19th century to the extent that I think he understands it, which is, you know, the strong do what they can and the weak suffer what they must, to quote Thucydides.
And that idea that we are powerful, we should be unconstrained, is very familiar in a sense.
That's what the Chinese foreign minister said at a meeting of ASEAN nations where he was telling, I think it was the Philippines or the Singaporeans, you know, you've got to understand, we are big and powerful.
You are not, we are going to tell you what to do.
Obviously, it is the way Putin views the world.
But that's why I think he has a much more benign view of Putin's desire to have a sphere of influence, a kind of a group of satellite states around him, including Ukraine.
He has a much more benign view, I think, of Chinese expansionism.
He very rarely criticizes it.
I can't remember him ever doing it.
And so then he looks at it and says, well, the United States should similarly have that kind of sense of the Monroe Doctrine, the Western Hemisphere.
Again, to me, it misses the sort of central point about the transformation of the international system after World War II, which is that you realized you don't need territory to become rich and powerful and incredibly effective in the world.
Look at South Korea.
South Korea is, I forget now, 15 times the per capita GDP of North Korea.
Look at tiny Israel, which is now essentially an advanced industrial country on a tiny spit of land, right?
Think about all the richest and most powerful countries in the world.
Land acquisition has almost nothing to do with, you know, who has a lot of land?
Russia.
It feels to me like a kind of bizarre, anachronistic way to look at the world.
But I agree with you.
That is the way he's thinking about it.
You could get whatever minerals you wanted to get out of Greenland by just signing a couple of deals with them.
You don't actually need to own it.
You could redo the Panama Canal Treaty and be much easier, by the way, to let the Panamanians run it.
And you've just, you know, kind of renegotiated it in terms you like.
But I think for Trump, part of it is this, you know, this kind of old fashioned view.
And part of it is I do think at the end of the day, there's a strong element of narcissism that infuses everything that Trump does.
And I think he loves the idea that he would be able to put his stamp on history by saying, you know, Trump added Greenland or something like that to the United States.
The physical expansion of America would be a great Trump legacy.
You mentioned Ukraine and Russia.
We're talking in the week when all that is being negotiated.
How would you describe what Trump's policy towards Ukraine now is?
It's almost impossible to have a kind of, again, a clear through line because it's moved so much.
You know, he had a tweet in which he said, you know, the Russians better realize, Putin better realize this war has ruined his country.
He better settle.
And if he doesn't, you know, we're going to put additional sanctions and his favorite weapon tariffs on Russia now.
But it seemed to suggest that he understood that the principal obstacle to a peace deal was not Zelensky, but Putin.
But then he's shifted entirely and enormously in the last few weeks where he's called Zelensky a dictator.
He said he started the war, all that stuff.
I mean, the UN resolution where the United States sided with Russia and North Korea and Belarus.
So, you know, you could argue that, again, in Trump's case, so much of it is personal.
He doesn't like Zelensky's.
But if you step back from that, I think that Trump in his heart believes that Russia has legitimate claims over Ukraine and so has a much softer line on Russia.
I think he thinks that the Russians should keep the territory they've acquired.
He thinks Ukraine should not be a part of NATO.
He thinks that maybe Ukraine should have a kind of neutrality in foreign policy.
These are all essentially the Russian demands.
There's no way to read his mind.
But my sense from listening to him and watching him is he thinks all those Russian claims are, you know, kind of broadly legitimate.
Let me push on this.
Because you know all this much better than I do.
I don't think he thinks anything about Ukraine and Russia, whose claims are legitimate.
I think he thinks Ukraine is worthless to the U.S.
And somebody at some point persuaded him their mental rights there.
And he thinks Russia is not.
That there is value for the U.S., for Trump personally, for the U.S. economy, an access to Russia, good relations with Russia.
And that there is some part of him that genuinely doesn't understand why we give a shit about Ukraine.
Ukraine as opposed to cutting a deal with Putin and getting something out of that transaction.
Yeah.
If you think about the countries and the leaders he likes, it's either the country is very strong or the leader is very strong.
It's Putin, Xi, Modi, the crown prince of Saudi Arabia, Orban, Erdogan.
You know, those are the people he speaks, talks about with respect.
The more muddled, compromised, weaker leaders of coalition governments in Europe he finds feckless.
He finds it uninteresting.
I think he likes these more old-fashioned countries.
You know, I've thought about this once, and I don't know if it's a reasonable point to make.
But the countries he seems fascinated by and respects are countries which you could imagine having lots of Trump towers.
The countries he doesn't like, you know, Europe, you couldn't imagine a Trump tower.
But in that way, is he picking up on something real?
And I think you see this a bit with J.D. Vance's – J.D. Vance is going out of his way to alienate the European governments of the moment.
America is weighing in on behalf of the AFD in Germany.
Their view is that there are regimes that they have affinity with.
And that the proper nature of American alliance isn't some unchanging alliance between America and Europe because we're all, quote-unquote, liberal democracies.
Trump doesn't want us to be a liberal democracy.
The proper nature is between regimes of affinity.
And in that way, Putin sees a world more like Trump does than Keir Starmer in the U.K.
Erdogan sees a world more like Trump does than Justin Trudeau does.
That the nature of the alliances they are seeking is a nature of regimes that are like them, regimes that could actually support, you know, have a genuine ideological affinity for who Trump is and what he wants and the world that he wants to see.
Yeah, I think you're raising something very important.
I think that part of what's going on here, this new dynamic in international relations we're watching, is that it's not all about power.
It's about ideology.
So, if you think about what is it that Putin is reacting to in the rise and hegemony of the West after the collapse of communism, some of it is Western power, the expansion of NATO, for sure.
But a lot of what Putin has been obsessed by has been the expansion of Western liberal ideas and ideology.
So, if you notice, the things that he talks so much about are the rise of multiculturalism in the West, the rise of a kind of libertine gender ideology, the idea of gender fluidity, even weighed in on the J.K. Rowling controversy.
These issues are central to the way that Putin thinks about Russian power, the power of his regime.
And so, he's viewed the rising tide and the spreading of Western liberal ideas as as much a threat as the expansion of NATO.
So, notice that when he really reacted with force against Georgia in 2008 and then against Ukraine in 2014, in both cases, the issue was not actually that these countries were about to join NATO.
They were not.
It's that they were going to join the European Union or at least wanted to have better relations with the European Union.
What does the European Union represent?
It represents some kind of idea of a Western-style capitalist liberal democracy.
And so, the way he looks at it is he doesn't want to be surrounded by those kind of countries.
He wants to be surrounded by countries like Belarus and Kazakhstan, quasi-authoritarian, somewhat kleptocratic regimes that he can control and manipulate.
And I think Xi also, if you listen to Xi Jinping, a lot of the things he's talked about is the dangers of too much Westernization, too much liberalism.
The Chinese have not just cracked down on the private sector.
They've cracked down on what they called the effeminacy of men.
He's talked about the virtues of motherhood and women going back to raising families.
So, again, he views this rising tide of Western liberalism as as much a threat, I think, as Western hard power.
And here, the irony is Trump and Vance agree with them.
And so, you know, for the first time now, you have in America a party or an ideology that says, yes, that's right.
And in a strange sense, and Steve Bannon would explicitly say this, our real allies should be Russia.
And that becomes the new alliance system.
Now, that takes it further than, you know, than we are right now.
But it's those inclinations.
But that's, I think, where this is really going.
And I think the way you see it is in Vance and Musk.
In Trump's first term, Trump is surrounded, particularly on the national security and foreign policy side, by members of the traditional Republican establishment.
You're H.R. McMaster's, you're Rex Tillerson's, Mike Pence as his vice president.
And none of them want this move, right?
This is not why John Kelly got into politics.
And so, it doesn't really happen.
What there is instead are these weird moments in interviews and elsewhere where Trump seems to talk about Putin with real affection in a way that he never talks about anybody in Europe that way.
Fast forward, you have Trump's second term in which he is surrounded by people who have been spending the intervening years building the ideology for what Trump intuitively was moving towards.
And it's not a complete purge in the Republican Party.
But what's left is too weak, even if the Senate Republicans don't love it in every instance.
And so, now you see this.
Like, the war between, like, autocracy as an ideological phenomenon and liberal democracy as an ideological phenomenon isn't now between America and Europe and these other countries.
It's inside America, too.
And now you really see it, right?
These people who are more framework-oriented going there and actively weighing in, as Elon Musk did on behalf of the AFD in Germany, J.D. Vance going to the Munich conference and really telling the Europeans that the great security threat is the way they run their governments.
Not Russia, not climate change.
It is the temperament and the policy of European liberalism.
Yeah, you know, many years ago, I wrote an article called The Rise of Illiberal Democracy in Foreign Affairs.
And I was trying to describe this phenomenon of countries where, with majorities, with pluralities, we had elected leaders who then systematically degraded the rule of law and individual rights and individual liberties.
And, of course, I meant it as a term of condemnation.
Viktor Orban gave a speech a few years after he came to power.
He didn't quote me, but he cited the phrase, illiberal democracy.
He said, people have talked about illiberal democracy.
That is what we want to achieve.
That is our goal.
We want to be an illiberal democracy because we don't believe in the tenets of Western liberalism.
And I think that that is, you know, where some impulses of the Trump administration go.
Now, I do want to say there are two possibilities, and you have outlined them yourself.
Because when you first started the conversation, you said the Trump people tell me, look, we just want to use unused American power and get a better deal within this framework that we've built up, right?
Like, we're OK with the illiberal international system.
We just think we got screwed.
So that's one theory of where Trump is going.
And I actually had a conversation with a very senior Republican this week who was hoping, and I would say was arguing, that that's where Trump is going.
Yeah, there's a lot of noise.
It's very messy.
He does things.
He negotiates out in the open in ways that you never would by demeaning Zelensky.
But what he's trying to do is to get a better deal.
But then there's the second view, which is the one we've just been talking about, which is, no, no, no, he's not trying to get a better deal.
He is trying to systematically remake the international system.
You know, and it reminds me, there was a period in the 1870s and 80s when the three great conservative monarchs of Europe, the Russians, the Austro-Hungarians, and the Germans got together and created a three-emperors' league.
It was called the Dreikaiser Bund, and they got together because they feared the rise of liberalism in Europe after the revolutions of 1848.
And it was meant to be these three conservative monarchs holding back the tide of liberalism.
And to a certain extent, you wonder whether for some of the people involved here, that is the way they are thinking about it.
We need to, we and Putin and maybe even, you know, Viktor Orban and people like Erdogan and Xi, we need to hold back all this kind of godless, reckless, libertine liberalism that is engulfing the world.
I do think there's a why not both to this.
As you were saying at the top of the show, it is very hard to say anything definitive about Donald Trump because he actually is flexible.
And he starts in one place and ends in another.
And he says we're going to annex Gaza and use it to build hotels, and I do want to talk about this in more detail.
But he also seems perfectly happy with a situation where the Arab League steps up.
He says he wants to sop huge tariffs on Canada and Mexico, but he also seems kind of happy if they just give him some concessions.
And I think two things are happening at once.
He takes deals.
He doesn't want a lot of friction.
He doesn't want markets to freak out.
He doesn't want to be committing U.S. troops in places where they're not wanted, right?
Trump has a real sense that the tolerance of the American people for pain and bad headlines is low.
And on the other hand, there is an erosion to what he is doing, right?
He is pushing and pushing and pushing, and the rocks slowly give way.
And so even as he's taking these deals, he's also alienating the Europeans.
Even as he's taking these deals, he's changing the way people think about America.
Even as he's taking these deals, maybe he cuts the deal on minerals with Ukraine.
I mean, he's also signaled to Moscow that he's open for a transaction, right?
And so even if he doesn't go all the way in the first deal, I mean, we're a month into his second term.
He's sending signals to every other player on the field to reimagine their strategies.
And for some, that's going to mean reimagining their strategy to create countermeasures to the U.S.
I think you're seeing that among the Europeans.
For some, that is going to mean reimagining their strategies, their offerings, their positioning to come closer to the U.S., to give Trump a deal that he can sell here.
I think that's for Putin, right?
I think that's for potentially China, somewhat to my surprise, given Trump's historic feeling that China is going to destroy the American economy.
And, you know, this game will be repeated again and again and again.
And by the end of it, by the end of turn after turn after turn of this, the entire system is in a very different place.
Not a place you could have gotten it into in one month, but a place you could definitely get it into in four years.
Yeah, and I think NATO has essentially been eroded already because what is NATO?
NATO is not the buildings, the treaty.
NATO is something very simple.
It is the question, will the United States of America come to the defense of a small European country if attacked by Russia?
And I think the events of the last few weeks have left, I can tell you, having talked to many Europeans, have left the Europeans in no doubt that if Lithuania were attacked tomorrow by Russia,
there is almost no chance that Donald Trump would do everything it took to defend Lithuania.
So that means they start asking themselves, you know, what is this new world we're living in?
And so you're seeing, I mean, this is really historic, that the new, the guy who's going to become the chancellor of Germany, Friedrich Merz,
has said the most urgent task for Europe now is to begin a step-by-step independence from the United States
because the United States, or at least Donald Trump, have shown themselves to be indifferent to the fate of Europe.
That is, you know, seismic for those really America's most important ally in Europe to say that our principal strategic task now is to find a strategy of independence away from the United States.
And you're going to see other countries do variations of that.
And in some cases, those countries will be probably doing private kind of hedging in a way that they can't publicly admit to.
The one part I don't agree with you is I think there are countries that are going to do deals with America.
Everyone is going to be wary of a long-term relationship because they realize that certainly in this new world, those don't mean that much.
I was in Australia last December, and I met with a senior official there who said to me, you know,
we're very happy to be in this closer relationship with the United States.
We're delighted that you're sharing your nuclear technology with us, you know, the nuclear subs deal that we made with them.
But the big question we wonder about is we have now put ourselves in a structurally confrontational role vis-a-vis our principal trading partner, China.
We didn't have to do that.
China is a long way away.
We were happily trading with them.
We hope to continue to do that.
But it has completely changed the relationship we have with China.
That's okay if you have our back.
But if in a few years you decide to cut a deal with China, we will have made a generational strategic error.
And I think that is what's going to be in every country's mind, you know, about getting close to the United States in a long-term – that's why I say these alliances took eight decades to build.
Let me take the other side of this.
What are the chances that Trump is exactly what Europe needs right now?
That it has been watching its productivity numbers functionally collapse.
That in something J.D. Vance was saying, it is overregulated and that is one reason it has almost no strong technology companies right now.
That Europe was not getting stronger under Joe Biden's protective umbrella.
That we've been watching actually Europe weaken.
We have been encouraging a kind of dependence from it and that here I guess I'm sounding like the senior Republican you're talking to.
But I've heard this and I don't think it's crazy that you may not ideologically like why Donald Trump is doing this.
But if the end result of it is a more independent Europe that spends more on defense and takes its own economic revitalization more seriously, that would be good for all parties.
And that it is frankly unlikely that Putin, when he's trying to build better relations with America, is going to invade a bunch of other countries and embarrass Donald Trump.
So the Moscow problem is not that big of a problem in the near term.
And a stronger Europe would be good for deterring that in the long run and was not going to happen under Joe Biden or Kamala Harris.
I broadly agree with what you're saying.
The Europe needed a kind of a kick in the pants.
And interestingly, the threat from Russia has turned out not to be big enough to get Europe kind of energized.
Because of us.
It could only not be big enough because of us.
And the threat of the abandonment of the United States is actually more significant than the threat of Russian aggression.
And so they will probably spend more.
They will coordinate more on defense.
Maybe they'll even do more.
I think that the fundamental issue with productivity in Europe is much larger than, you know, the U.S. or Russia.
Seeing where the total factor productivity rises in Europe over the next five years may be unrelated.
But I do think they will coordinate more in defense.
They'll coordinate more in foreign policy.
They'll get more.
They'll spend more.
What you will lose is they will be less deferential to the United States.
I think it might be bad for us.
Right.
I was about to say we had a system where we kind of ran the world.
We ran the world because the European Union essentially did exactly what we wanted them to and was a satellite of the United States.
So we would be experimenting with a different system.
Yeah, the Europeans will spend more.
You know, it is worth pointing out it's there was a reason we wanted to denationalize the foreign and defense policies of countries like Germany.
And Germany in particular, trapped in the center of Europe, has always had a difficult time having a kind of sensible, moderate foreign policy.
So there were great virtues to saying to the Germans, you know what, guys, don't worry so much about your security.
We'll take care of it.
For the last hundred years when you've worried about it, things haven't turned out so well.
And I think Germany is a completely different country now, but it is taking us into a different world.
By the way, there will be no defense savings out of all this.
The idea that the United States will be able to spend less because the Europeans are spending more misunderstands what our defense budget is about.
We are the only global superpower.
We are trying to be engaged in every part of the world.
I mean, this is a this is a president who says we should be in Gaza.
We, you know, we have to deter the Japanese.
We need Greenland because we want to be able to be sure that we control the Arctic.
And by the way, we need to be controlling the Panama Canal.
You know, that's the way even even Trump conceives of America's role.
So there's going to be no defense savings.
So at the end of the day, yeah, it's possible that we get a more independent Europe that spends more on defense.
I think that I would prefer a kind of tough love approach where there was actually some love.
Among the places where I am surprised by what policy is looking like and what the rhetoric coming out of the administration is like is China, where what were we told he was going to do and going to think?
That he's going to come in and put a 65 percent tariff on all goods from China.
Nothing like that is happening.
It's been much more aggressive in some ways with threats of tariffs towards Europe and Canada and Mexico.
He's now begun talking about some kind of big deal with China where they would just buy more of our stuff, which is sort of like a deal he struck in the first term, even though they didn't end up buying the stuff.
But I would have told you that he actively wants a hostile relationship with China.
And now he doesn't seem to actively want a hostile relationship with China.
It was him who initially came up with, or at least people in his administration, with forcing the sell-off of TikTok.
Now he's the savior of TikTok.
How do you describe where the Trump administration seems to be or seems to be moving on China?
Again, you know, with Trump, so much of it is personal.
So the reason he seems to have moved on TikTok is because he realized that there was a large group of people supporting him on TikTok.
TikTok was good for him.
It was a good platform for him to get his message out.
And it's possible sometimes with Trump that it's as simple as that, that, you know, he realized TikTok is good for me, so I'm for it.
But I think that with China, you have always had this conflicting pressure.
And you saw it in Trump 1, in 1.0.
He was hostile to a China in the campaign.
He talked about massive tariffs against China.
And he comes in and he, you know, invites Xi Jinping to Mar-a-Lago.
And he's dazzled by that.
And his grandchildren sing Chinese songs to Xi Jinping.
And he talks about this beautiful chocolate cake he serves him.
He likes the idea that he is, you know, sitting with the second most powerful person in the world.
And they, you know, they have a relationship and they get on.
I mean, the whole Trump 1.0 on China was kind of a nothing because they put tariffs on.
And, you know, somebody did a calculation that something like 95% of the value of the revenues collected for the tariffs went to subsidies to American farmers to compensate them for the loss.
So we didn't even make any money off of it, which Trump often talks about with tariffs.
This time around, I think he seems to be much less even rhetorically hostile toward China.
My inclination is to go where you're going.
He wants to deal with China.
He wants to have some kind of a better working relationship with China.
I think to a large extent that could be a good thing.
And I think that, you know, one of the things I worry about in the new world we're going into, China is embarking on a massive military buildup.
China is probably going to quadruple the number of nuclear weapons it has in the next 10 years.
That's all.
And, you know, to a certain extent, I understand China's point of view, which is they are the second richest country in the world.
Why should they not have an arsenal that's as big as Russia's?
But it can be very destabilizing.
That period when the Soviets expanded their nuclear arsenal in the late 50s and 60s and the United States and the Soviets were going matching mano a mano is a very unstable period.
Think of the Berlin crisis, the Cuban Missile Crisis.
So to have a better working relationship with China during that, in this period, I think is a very, very good thing.
And if, for whatever reason, Trump gets there, I'd be the first to applaud it.
How have you taken Trump's attitude towards Israel and Gaza, his proposals, his appointments?
How would you describe it?
I think what Trump represented for the Israelis was the most unqualified support that any American president was ever going to give to an Israeli prime minister.
And the relationship is obviously very personal between Trump and Bibi.
As a result of that, by the way, he was able to get a ceasefire because, in effect, you know, what it seems that his envoy told Bibi, you're not going to get a better deal from Trump.
So you better take this one.
This is in the waning days of the Biden administration.
But I think that it's also a kind of ideological affinity to Bibi-ism, if you will.
If you notice in that UN resolution in which the United States absolutely bizarrely sided with Russia against Ukraine, against almost every democratic country in the world, in basically not condemning the Russian aggression in Ukraine,
there were two unusual countries that went along with the U.S., Russia, North Korea, Belarus.
It was Hungary and Israel.
And I think what that tells you is that there is this ideological affinity that Trump feels with Bibi, both wrongly persecuted by the liberal elites of their country,
both representing the kind of silent majority in their minds, both believing in, you know, huge amounts of disruption, both tough guys.
So there's, I think, a kind of personal and ideological connection that Trump has with Bibi's Israel.
And you can see it when you watch them together.
The fear that the people I know who work on Middle East policy had about Donald Trump was that if he was elected, you would have an American president functionally supportive of Israeli annexation of the West Bank and possibly of Gaza.
What they didn't expect was any desire on that same American president's behalf to personally annex Gaza, right?
Nobody saw, well, actually, no, Israel shouldn't take Gaza.
America should take Gaza.
What do you think that proposal is?
Do you understand where it came from?
Do you have a sense of how much he would actually risk to make it happen?
Like, how have you read it?
You know, we have tried to understand it.
And most people, with a lot of what Trump says, it does appear to have come out, you know, almost spontaneously.
And so my guess is what happened is Bibi Netanyahu essentially expressed what has long been a kind of right-wing fantasy in Israel,
which is if only we could clear these Palestinians out of Gaza, this would be a great place for us to, you know, it was a big mistake for us to leave.
And it's an amazing piece of land.
We could think of the wonders we could do with Gaza.
So it maybe came out of that.
What it has done is it has, in some ways, given comfort to both the extremists on both sides.
So right-wing Israelis now say, and I mean people to the right of Bibi Netanyahu, say, you see, this was not a fantasy.
This was something real.
The president of the United States is now advocating getting the Palestinians out of Gaza.
So all those people have dug in and believe that this is really viable.
And by the way, it's spreading to their views on the West Bank as well, because the right-wing fantasy in Israel has always been make life so difficult for the Palestinians
that effectively they will slowly but surely start moving away.
They'll go to Jordan.
They'll go to Egypt.
The Egyptians and Jordanians will be forced to take them.
But on the other hand, it does seem to have also reinforced among the hardline Palestinians the idea that, look, the Americans only mean bad things for us.
Don't be very wary of any of this American involvement, because what the Americans really want to do is ethnically cleanse all of us out of Gaza.
So they're digging in, they're trying to figure out how do we maintain our presence, how do we make sure that if there is some kind of an American or Israeli suzerainity here, we would launch an insurgency.
So I don't see it as having produced anything particularly good.
And it has really reinforced this very, this very strong element within the Israeli right that believes there is a solution to the Palestinian problem.
And it is largely ethnic cleansing of Gaza and the West Bank.
In Joe Biden, you had the apex of the liberal international order believers.
Joe Biden's whole career in the Senate was devoted to this quite significantly.
He was known for his commitment to these alliances, known for his belief in a sort of muscular liberal internationalism.
It was always notable the way when he was deciding whether or not to stay in the race.
The thing that seemed to animate him in that period was NATO.
And if not for me, who's going to protect NATO and the alliances?
And he says, and they had this vision of American strength through the alliance system.
And it led to a world or it coexisted with a world that by the end of his term felt to many people like it had fallen into disorder.
You had Russia invading Ukraine, you had the war in Gaza, and you had a sense of American weakness.
I mean, some of that was Joe Biden's inability to personally project strength, whatever you thought of the actual policies.
Now you've had Trump come in for a month and the whole world is reshuffling in response to what he says.
You have negotiations happening with Moscow, you have mineral deals being signed with Ukraine, you have in Gaza, all of a sudden, for the insanity, in my view, of Trump's actual proposal, I am hearing more serious proposals from the Arab countries than I was before.
Yair Lapid, one of the opposition leaders in Israel, had a reasonable, I thought, proposal of wiping out Egyptian foreign debt in return for Egypt,
taking over rebuilding and governance of Gaza for a period of time, the sense that the world is responding to American strength.
Did Democrats fumble this in their belief that a restrained America was a strong America, that more did not need to be projected?
Did they leave the opening for someone like Trump who said, there's all this surplus power and the American public is going to respond to seeing someone come pick it up?
That the sense that the world should respond to America, that we should be feared by our friends and our enemies alike, had been dismissed.
I've heard this from people involved in the Middle East conflict.
Nobody feared Joe Biden.
Look, I think that, you know, there's no question the United States had enormous power.
Again, I say it sort of contradicts the central premise of the Trump-Vance domestic argument, which is that America has been hollowed out and ravaged over the last 30 years by the forces of globalization and liberalism.
In fact, the real story of the last 30 years is the United States has emerged dominant among the rich countries in the world.
And they seem to envy the political systems of countries that are in terrible shape.
Right.
Right.
Hungary, Russia, China, which is seeing its growth rates fall.
They have a lot of envy of systems that you would not want to emulate.
China doesn't have a trade deficit.
And look at China, right?
Like, that's not a country you'd want to emulate the economy of.
So there is a kind of weird contradiction.
But I agree with you.
The United States has enormous power.
And I don't think that it is a sign of strength to go around bullying smaller countries and forcing them to say, you know, things that are often kind of rhetorical concessions.
You know, get everyone to call it the Gulf of America.
You know, get the Panamanians a good example.
The guy who is running Panama now is a very pro-American conservative.
And he's now been humiliated and made to, you know, mouth some kind of nonsense that allows Trump to claim he got a victory.
Same thing happened with Canada and Mexico.
But I'm going to address it because I want to push you to the strong examples here, the strong counter examples, which is to say that I had Jake Sullivan on the show.
And we were talking about Ukraine and we were talking about Israel.
And I would say the view that emerged from him is that it would be immoral to use American leverage to push our allies into negotiations in Ukraine to force Israel to have done really anything differently in Gaza.
And that as soon as Trump came on the scene, it turned out people would listen like the hostage deal got signed and Yahoo dropped some some objections like we they move forward on some kind of ceasefire.
You had negotiations not in the way I would like to see them had preconceding functionally everything to Moscow is, in my view, fundamentally immoral.
But the level at which the Biden administration would not push its own allies and did not act like it had leverage over someone like Zelensky was strange by the end.
You could tactically say there are some cases where, you know, they didn't handle it well.
I for many, many months was criticizing the Biden administration on the Russia-Ukraine front.
I mean, I thought that it was important to get more realistic on Israel.
It's a particular dynamic that you well know, which is that for a Democratic president, it is very hard to push the Israelis to do anything because they know they can outflank a Democrat by going directly to Congress, by going directly to essentially Republicans.
Bibi Netanyahu did that to Barack Obama, who's a much more skilled, you know, politician and negotiator than Joe Biden was.
And when Obama tried to push him on the Iran nuclear thing, Bibi just did an end run around Obama, went to Washington, got the Republicans to invite him to give a joint speech to the Joint Session of Congress and completely, you know, kind of tied Obama in knots on that one.
So that is a particular problem.
But I agree with you that tactically there are some places where you could push harder.
If you ask me which philosophy is the right one for the United States to have, I think it's the one that has built these alliance structures in this system for 80 years by not viewing this as a series of transactions, but as a relationship.
Trump is a transaction guy.
Think about every real estate deal he's ever done.
At the end of the day, the person he does the deal with never wants to deal with him again.
I mean, that is basically one of the leitmotifs of Trump's business career.
He screws you in the deal and then moves on and the next time around screws somebody else.
But that's not what American foreign policy has been built on.
It's been built on these alliances and these relationships that have endured now for almost a century.
And by the way, very few countries have managed that.
So Trump, by strong arming a few people, a few of these countries will get in the short term a better deal.
Again, we're very powerful.
We're very rich.
But is that going to build real trust for the next 40, 50 years?
I don't think so.
It's going to give Trump a few good headlines.
And by the way, on the Gaza thing, I think it's important to remember, because I've spent a lot of time in the Middle East over the last nine months or so.
I've been to Saudi Arabia three times, four times.
They were always willing to pay for the reconstruction.
The idea that Trump's bizarre Gaza proposal has gotten the Saudis and the Egyptians to be ready to be involved is not true.
The issue has always been who will govern Gaza.
And that was, you know, the Israelis say it can't be any Hamas involvement.
The Arabs say, look, if it's going to be no Hamas involvement, then you have to allow the Palestinian Authority to do it.
And the Israelis say no.
And the Israeli response is, why can't the Arabs do it?
Well, the Arabs don't want to be in the position of ruling over the Palestinians.
They don't want to be in a position where Hamas launches an insurgency against them.
That has been the sticking point, not the money.
They've always been willing to pay the money.
And by the way, that will continue to be the sticking point.
That is the hard part of the Gaza business, not getting the Saudis and the UAE to pony up the cash.
The thing that I think I'm pushing towards here is not, is Trumpism the right long-term strategy for the U.S.?
But assuming the system survives the next couple of years, which in the range of possibilities, I don't think is 100%.
I don't think it's 100% domestically, and I don't think it's 100% internationally.
I think there's a question of there being sort of thesis, antithesis, synthesis dynamics to where things probably need to go.
I think that with Doge, where Democrats were accepting – I mean, I have a whole book on this coming out –
but Democrats were accepting of huge levels of government, proceduralism, obstruction, the inability of government to deliver or be responsive.
They became defenders of government.
Now you have a group heedlessly taking chainsaws, trying to actually wreck the thing in a way I consider immoral and genuinely dangerous.
But I think to find some stable equilibrium, Democrats are going to have to take some lessons from this, right?
Not just say, we were right before, you guys should have listened to us.
In the way I think we now understand that center-left parties kind of in Europe and in America had adopted positions on immigration that were politically unstable.
And they don't need to go all the way to where the far right is, but they can't be where they were if they're going to win power.
Is there some ways in which lessons need to be learned here for there to be an effective center-left answer or even a left answer or liberal answer to what this set of challenges represents?
Is there some dissatisfaction with how the system is working, either from the American perspective or the international perspective,
that needs to be integrated even if you find, as many of us do, where Trump is going, immoral?
Yeah, look, the left has collapsed everywhere.
I mean, if you look at Europe, the real story of the European elections over the last, you know, 10 years is the collapse of the left.
The French left has collapsed.
The German left has collapsed.
If you go and look, you know, Holland, wherever you look, Sweden was run by the Swedish social democrats for 75 years, and they're in trouble.
And I think it's principally over the issue of immigration.
As you know, I've been hard-lined on immigration.
I think the whole system is—the asylum system needs to be scrapped.
And the fact that the left was not willing to frontally acknowledge that you had millions of people coming in who were obviously gaming the system,
claiming to be asylum seekers when they were really economic migrants,
I think the left is paying a huge price for that everywhere, and they will continue to pay a price for that,
because even now it'll feel like catch-up, you know, when they do it.
On the international side, I don't think there was any such deep dissatisfaction with the international system as it exists.
I think it's, you know, to a large extent, Trump's grievances around it that have exploited it.
But he taps into a certain kind of American Jacksonianism that says, why are we entangled with these people?
Why—you know, the United States has always had two fundamental attitudes.
One, we are too good to participate in the world, or we are so good that we should completely transform the world.
But to actually engage in the world as it exists has always been difficult for the United States,
because it's an ideological nation.
You know, it believes it is exceptional and all that.
And I think you see some of that in the Trump attitude.
I think the point you made about Europe is the principal place why I would say there was a lesson to learn,
that we had gotten too complacent about the Western alliance,
and we had gotten too complacent about Europe's foreign policy dysfunctions.
And I think, you know, in some ways, Trump's willingness to, you know, to sort of say—
say the—think the unthinkable and say the unsayable.
Like, he said, for example, maybe we should make a deal with Iran.
You know, he went in his first term and tried to make a deal with Kim Jong-un.
Those things I actually do find refreshing, because why not try to see if there's a way you could make a deal with Kim Jong-un?
Why not see if there's a way?
I think all these things are low probabilities of success, but there is something to be said for, you know,
kind of thinking out of the box in some way or the other.
I feel like with Trump, the danger is not the thinking out of the box part.
The danger is he doesn't value that the box we created is a pretty special box,
and it's been very hard in human history to find an era of peace and prosperity and great power stability
of the kind we have been able to create.
So, you know, before we have this kind of Maoist nihilism and say,
let's burn the whole thing down and see where it goes, let's appreciate the box.
How does the destruction of USAID fit into this in one way or another?
I think it's been—because that got filed under Doge,
I think it's been treated as less of a foreign policy move than it actually is.
They seem to have successfully continued to keep the money pretty cut off in a lot of cases,
even in places where, say, you know, Marco Rubio seemed to want PEPFAR funding,
which is funding for HIV-AIDS medication, particularly in Africa, turned on,
and it seems to have not really turned back on.
Is this foreign policy?
Is this just a kind of internal jihadism against what they see as the liberal nonprofit industrial complex?
What do you—what is the import of what they've done to USAID?
And what is, to the best you believe they have it, the rationale for it?
So I've thought about this a lot, you know, because why would you choose USAID?
It's 1% of the federal budget.
If you were able to change some of the uploading, you know, mechanisms and Medicare advantage,
you'd probably save more money than in reforming USAID.
You know, Medicare is a trillion dollars.
Social Security is a trillion and a half dollars.
USAID is about $40 billion.
And they don't seem to be reforming it.
They're annihilating it.
So I think what happened is, if there's thought behind it, there must have been.
Musk and companies said,
what is the least popular form of spending that the U.S. does?
And Marco Rubio alluded to this.
It's obviously foreign aid.
You know, sending money to foreigners.
People feel like, why shouldn't we be spending it at home?
It's easy, right?
So I think that that was the idea.
Let's go for an easy win.
Let's go for something where particularly our base, the MAGA base,
and most Americans in general, think this is a waste of government spending.
And they went at it with a brutality, I think, to send a signal to other government agencies.
Don't block us.
This is how, you know, this is what will happen to you if you try to, in some way or the other,
do an end run around what we're doing.
Look, the effect, to my mind, is tragic because there's the sort of geopolitical argument
that this is the soft power of the United States.
We go into these countries and people think, well, of America.
Now the Chinese are going to go in.
The Russians are going to go in.
I believe all that.
But I think it's, I wouldn't, you know, you put it in those competitive terms to sell it,
and I get it.
But, you know, it's been one of the wonderful things that the United States has done in the world.
Foreign aid barely existed before 1945.
It's, again, one of these revolutions of foreign policy that America, in large part, initiated.
And, you know, I think it is largely the impulse comes from the idea we're the richest country
in the history of the world.
It would, it's also be a great thing for us to be the most generous country in the history of the world.
Four out of every 10 humanitarian dollars spent in the world are spent by the United States.
And most of USAID's budget is food and medicine.
You're literally feeding the hungry.
You're, you're, you're, you're clothing sick people.
I've seen this on the ground.
The people who do work at USAID, these are people who move to, you know, Mozambique or Ghana
to learn how to, how to get water filtration systems in there.
They're getting paid 60, $70,000 a year.
They're, they're, they're not doing it for the money.
They're not doing it for the glory.
They're doing it because they believe that the United States can, can have a kind of positive
impact on the world.
And to see the, you know, the agency got it, the funding pulled, and these people demeaned
and demonized, called a criminal enterprise.
It's so sad.
You know, I grew up in India and I saw so much of the USAID funding, which was exactly
the kind of stuff that Doge demonizes, which was to say, I mean, there was a, there was
a program where they would, they'd show old American movies at, at, at, in the U.S.
consulate.
And a whole bunch of us would go there.
And I remember, I mean, I went to, I saw It's a Wonderful Life and movies like that.
And, and you know what, it did have, you know, it made me fall in love with America.
It made, I think that's always been America's great strength, which is that it's the Chinese
who do these deals with an African country and with the dictator and say, you know, we'll
build you a dam.
And in return for that, here's what we want.
And by the way, you can take 10%.
What American soft power has been, we let the world know who we are.
We let the world know that we're a big, open, generous country.
And some of that is funding plays and movies.
And, and some of it is, and most of it is food and medicine.
And I was always a matter of great pride to me that the United States did that.
And it's very sad that it's, that it's for now at least gone, gone away.
I think it also gets to what is America first.
And one of the things that I actually think it is, is a total devaluing of non-American
lives.
We were talking, you were saying a minute ago how USAID is being, you know, Musk calls
it a, what was it?
A ball of worms.
It's like no worms in the apple, just a, a ball of worms.
So that's a horrible thing to say about, you know, I know people who work in aid like
you do.
Musk is a billionaire who juts around the world, fathering children with Lord knows how many
women and tweeting, you know, sending missives on X 300 times a day.
And, and these people who, you know, went to amazing schools, go work on, you know, marginally
improving economic growth by making the textile sector more efficient in Ghana.
So just, it appalls me, but, but at least like the Americans who are working for USAID
exist in the calculus, like the administration hates them and wants to demonize them and
wants them to go to the private sector where they'll be more, you know, productive.
But the kids who, the children who needed PEPFAR funding, the, the antiretrovirals from
PEPFAR, they don't exist in the conversation here at all.
Right.
And it's always, I think, a difficult thing from the perspective of a nation, right, which
does have a preference for its own citizens, like how should you think about an economic
migrant who's, you know, any individual economic migrants, life would be much better off if
they could come to the U.S.
And for reasons of stability in the economy, you can't let everybody who'd like to come
to the U.S.
And like, how do you value that?
Right.
It's a really hard question.
And, and we don't have, I think, very good answers.
And, you know, we, we tack forward and backward.
How do you value like people we save from dying of malnutrition?
The answers have been complex and not always really debated, but, but somewhat, we value
those lives somewhat.
It's not how we think about Americans, but it's not nothing.
And I kind of think one of the messages here is it's nothing.
Like the value of foreign lives is nothing.
The value of people in the West Bank whose land is going to be annexed is nothing.
Our care about, you know, the Ukrainians is nothing.
Right.
And I think that's some of the message of it too, particularly domestically, that USAID
was about spending American money to not really serve our interests first and foremost.
I think you're right to say that when we say it's really about our soft power, not truly
telling the truth anymore, it's about expressing our values, which is that other lives matter
and particularly if there's cost-effective ways we can help them, we should.
And the message here is they don't, and we shouldn't.
You know, I think that one of the ironies here is that I do believe, as you do, that
American aid was never entirely about geopolitics and geostrategy.
Part of it, I think, came out of a kind of deep, high Protestant impulse of, you know,
saving the world.
And I think it is one of the central messages of Christianity that all, you know, all human
beings are equal in the eyes of God.
And, you know, it is incumbent on the rich to look after the poor.
I mean, I've always been struck by the, if you read the Sermon on the Mount, if you read
Paul's letter to the Galatians, it is, that's what Christianity is about.
It's like, you know.
Not if you hear J.D.
Vance's version of it.
Right, which is, to me, is bizarre.
And yet here you have this, you know, this Christian administration neglecting what strikes
me as the central tenets of Christianity, which are, you know, be nice to poor people,
help people who are in need, the Good Samaritan, all that stuff.
And this was our one expression of it.
For every, you know, every hundred dollars the federal government spent, we were saying
we're going to give one dollar to clothe the naked and feed the hungry.
And I would have been, look, I am somebody who believes you could have targeted a bunch
of those dollars better.
I would have moved a lot to public health, to cash transfers.
You know, if you want to say we shouldn't be doing plays, fine, right?
We can have that debate.
Actually, auditing USAID would have been fine with me.
That's why I think the message was that they didn't do that.
I've heard people...
And just to push back, USAID was audited 60 times in the last year.
You could have audited from their perspective.
Yeah, you could have.
And, you know, and by the way, that play was not a USAID spend.
It was an American ambassador who decided to help to fund a cultural festival in Ireland.
You know, so much of this is...
Yes, there's been a lot of bullshit here.
But it is, I know a lot of people who work in foreign aid and a lot of people who work
in making foreign aid more effective.
And there is a big bureaucracy and there is waste.
No question about it.
And not only...
And I don't even mean waste.
I actually mean that from their perspective, I think it would be reasonable for a Republican
administration to come in and say, too much of this is cultural.
Too much, you know, I want this money spent differently.
Fine.
I've heard people say, well, what Doge is really doing is zero-based budgeting.
We're just making everything re-justify itself.
Well, then you would have it re-justify itself based on some set of measures, right?
Does it achieve this?
You know, dollars per life saved, right?
I know people who spend all their days trying to figure out how many dollars does it take
to save a life here.
And the not doing any of that, that to me was actually the message, right?
They didn't want USAID audited.
Because actually a lot of things sound great if you audited USAID, even from any kind of
humanitarian perspective they could come up with.
PEPFAR is an amazing program.
It was that the expression of values was the point there.
And the expression of values of Trump and America first is that we are the only ones who
count.
And it's why, you know, J.D. Vance's riff that, you know, Christianity has this understanding
of this intense partiality of favor, right?
It's, you know, our family and our neighbors and our community and like out and out and
out and out till you have basically no responsibility to the world.
And as an American leader, but also just as an American citizen, your compassion belongs
first to your fellow citizens.
It doesn't mean you hate people from outside of your own borders, but there's this old
school, and I think it's a very Christian concept, by the way, that you love your family and
then you love your neighbor and then you love your community and then you love your fellow
citizens in your own country.
And then after that, you can focus and prioritize the rest of the world.
It's fine for that to be your politics, but to pretend that's your religion.
Well, and the, you know, he was corrected by the Pope.
Yes.
And then, yes, when the Pope has to come in personally in his frail health before he ended
up in the hospital for double pneumonia to say, no, wait, you just converted to Catholicism
and as the head Catholic, let me tell you, that's not how we think about it.
You know, a more humble person might have rethought some things.
You know, you've talked a lot about what it took to build the international system that
we can now take for granted or that we got to the point where we felt we could take it
for granted.
And I think about when I read a lot of history, what it took to get to the point that we actually
thought lives of individual people around the world had some value, that they weren't
just pawns, that their destruction was meaningful.
Because I look at a lot of history and I don't think people put a very heavy value on life,
right?
You know, if you had to wipe a bunch of people out to get what you wanted, you did.
The poor suffered what they must.
And with Trump, I see a return to that moral framework, among other things.
And you can make a lot of criticisms of Democrats, of Republicans, of George W. Bush, of Joe Biden,
right?
Look at the destruction visited upon the Gazans in the past year.
But there was at least some framework that existed that you could yell, hypocrite, right?
How dare you?
Look at what you said before and what you're allowing now.
And I think part of their foreign policy is the destruction of that framework entirely.
Where there's nothing you could say hypocrite of.
They've been perfectly clear they don't care.
I mean, that way it's very unchristian.
It's very, very great powers of the 19th century.
And, you know, if you're not somebody who's big enough to be written about in the history
books, there's just not value to what you represent.
Like, you can just be used as a pawn or taken off the board if you just happen to be in the
way.
Yeah.
You know, if you think about the mood now is this kind of macho realism.
You know, Trump is about doing deals.
We don't worry about all these values.
You know, we're just going to do what's best for America.
We're going to use our surplus power.
All of that evokes this kind of, you know, 19th century realpolitik.
And what people forget about that world was it was a world of constant war, massive human
rights abuses.
You know, the way that the rich countries thought about poor countries then was let's colonize
them.
Let's exploit them.
Let's enslave their people.
You know, there's something weird about forgetting what that world entailed and forgetting how important
it was that we had this revolution in international affairs over the last century where we've, you
know, we've moved to a completely different place.
And, you know, it's, to my mind, one of the sad ironies about all this is that the country
that did more than any other country to affect that revolution, beginning with Woodrow Wilson,
is the one now undermining it.
If you had told me, you know, who's going to undermine the open international system, the
liberal international order 10 or 15 years ago, that would have said, oh, it's going
to be the rise of China.
Oh, it's going to be the rogue actions of Russia.
Or it's going to be the, you know, the Iranians.
No, it turns out to be the United States of America that turns its back on its own creation.
I think that's the place to end.
So what was our final question then?
What are three books you'd recommend to the audience?
So I was thinking about it, and one of them, I think, would be Robert Kagan's book,
The Jungle Grows Back, which is a short book that tries to explain the nature of this world
that America built, and how its erosion and decay will result in the jungle growing back,
the jungle of realpolitik, war, you know, poverty, all the things that existed before.
The second would be, if you want to get a feel for 19th, 18th century diplomacy, and, you
know, its ups and downs.
Henry Kissinger wrote a wonderful kind of history called diplomacy, and it begins in
the 17th century, and it goes all the way to, you know, the 1970s, 80s, as I recall.
The third would be, again, thinking about this world America built.
If you want a kind of wonderful biographical lens into it, Walter Isaacson and Evan Thomas
wrote a book called The Wise Men, and it was a story of six people who were instrumental
in building the post-World War II American order.
So for all those of you who are fans of Walter Isaacson, this was actually his very first
biography.
He wrote it with one of his closest friends, Evan Thomas.
They were both editors at Time.
It's a wonderful read.
It's my review of that book for an obscure publication called The American Scholar is my
first published piece in the world, so I have a particular affection for it.
Farid Zakaria, thank you very much.
Good to be here, Esra.
