Okay, I'm going to Google Street View in Zanzibar, right here. But I'm going to try to convince you
that the most interesting direction to look is not to the left or to the right, but down.
Why does the revolutionary government of Zanzibar have a logo right here on this truck,
which doesn't look like a normal Google Street View car? That's because this is the world of
unofficial Google Street View. All these lines are street views that Google didn't make,
but that still show up on Google Maps. This is the visualization of a secret economy that you can
only see when you look down. It shows up everywhere from hustling realtors to explorers in the Australian
bush. Wow. I talked to him. To off-roaders across the world in Utah. Just look at this terrain.
And look who's driving it. All the way to government corporate partnerships that have
carved out a unique spot in the Google Street View world. Right there. I went through hundreds of
Street View images. I talked to a ton of people and I came up with five categories for the secret
economics of Google Street View. It is surprising. It is secretive. And it says something about the
economy at large. You just have to know which direction to look. Hello, everybody. Hey, man.
I've actually never played this game in my whole life. You're gonna love it, Yoakum. So last week,
I got together with some YouTubers, um, Neo, Echo Zero, Present Past, Chupel, and they all put me in
last place in GeoGuessr. If you don't know what GeoGuessr is, and I'm surprised that there are a lot of people who don't,
basically it is a game where you are plopped into a random location on Google Street View.
You then have to place a pin that is your best guess as to where in the world you are.
The closer you are to the correct location, the more points that you get.
I always get distracted with these because it's just so fast. There's fascinating stuff
that's not helpful to figure out the place. GeoGuessr is not just a fun Street View game,
though. It is actually a good lens to look at the official economies around Google Street View.
It's 1907. This book of photo auto maps, they printed street level pictures next to directions.
Everyone knew that this was a great idea. A hundred years later, the tech caught up. Google
Street View launched in 2007. I actually want to show you one of the earliest shots taken on Google
Street View. Right here, you can actually go back to 2007 and see it. You can actually go forward in
time and see the improvements in the camera technology. Here's 2024. Here's 2007. The map of
official Google Street View coverage like this, it is intricate and expansive and beautiful, and
these official maps have their own economics. Out of the 80 billion Google earnings pie in the first
quarter of 2024, it's not really broken out, but Morgan Stanley estimated that 11 billion came from
Google Maps. Street View mainly makes Google Maps better. However, Google does charge GeoGuessr and
other services a specific Street View API fee to do all that clicking around, not just here in the game,
but also here on the map. Street View adds so much value that competitor programs are common. There's
Mapillary, which is owned by Meta. They have some street level images and it hooks up to OpenStreetMap.
They've also posted some 3D walkthroughs, so maybe it's a metaverse thing. We don't really know.
All I know is I'm kind of making myself dizzy going around this. The big tech players all have
Street View competitors, including China's Baidu. So you won't find a lot of China imagery on Google
Street View, but on Baidu Maps, you can walk around like all day and there's just fascinating stuff to
look at. But the official Street View economy, it's kind of a rounding error for these big tech companies.
It's the unofficial economy where these things get interesting.
So all these are unofficial. That means they are locations that weren't made by Google,
but were uploaded by contributors to Google Street View as a platform.
The unofficial thing is incredibly challenging here.
We were not playing a normal GeoGuessr map. GeoGuessr normally draws from official Google Street View
imagery, but we were playing a map called An Unofficial Street World. This is all the official
Street View coverage in, say, the United States. But there's a lot of unofficial coverage too.
That's stuff that anyone can upload to the platform. Let's go to Africa. Here you can see
the difference between official and unofficial is even starker. The circles on this map are
photosphere 360-degree pictures where you can't walk around like in Street View because it's people
taking pictures. Mike, in my GeoGuessr game, has actually made a bunch of these.
I was doing these all the time and uploading them, and you get so many views and so many
like Google Maps credit. What do the points give you? It gives you like Google Maps cred. You know,
like street cred for Google Maps. Street cred, Phil. Street cred.
Photospheres are simpler than Street View images, but they're actually really cool. Here, let's go to
Cuba. All the little blue circles that show up on this map, those are all photospheres that people
have taken in Cuba. You are on the street in Cuba. This is just because somebody took this picture
and uploaded it to Street View. You can go to really interesting places with these photospheres.
I have explored in Turkmenistan. Cool. Night scene. You can even check out locations in North Korea.
There aren't a lot of them, but the ones that there are are pretty insane.
And you can see if you look down, we have this pair of shoes to thank for this photosphere.
But this gets really interesting when it comes to Street View images that people have uploaded.
Let's go back across the world. So let me find this. There's this big trail
that runs for really long distance in Virginia. And Darren, he and his friends mapped all of it.
But remember the first rule of Street View. Look down.
This is the first time that I've ever wanted an ATV. Whoa, this is sick. We wanted really high
quality cameras. It looks almost like a UFO with like six, eight lenses around it. And it's heavy.
It's extremely heavy. So we needed something that we knew we could cover 45 miles. The ATV was probably
the solution to that. It's like it can carry something heavy. It's not a car. It's not even a small
car. It's not a motorcycle. And it was probably the safest thing we could do.
So Darren went to a lot of work to do this. I mean, he got permits in different counties.
He tackled big file management issues, and he uploaded it all just so that this trail
could be easier for people to use. There are also really fun Street View practical jokes.
Let me show you this one in Sweden. Somebody put their RV on here and you can go inside.
There are also really useful applications of this. Let's go back across the world again to Virginia.
I talked to Peter who goes to rural parts of Virginia, and he has mapped a ton of roads there.
He just goes down these roads and maps them because it helps out first responders.
The addresses is really where Google lacks a lot here. So that's what got me into maps.
And then the hydrants was, as first responders, we have hydrant maps, but they're kind of proprietary
and not as easy to use as data being on OpenStreetMap. And I guess it started primarily for the
for the hydrants. And now, I mean, my reason for doing it is, is beyond as more than that. It's just,
it's a hobby and I enjoy it. So yeah, in rural areas, it'll, the addresses aren't, I mean, houses
aren't all right along the road. One might be right facing the road. Another one might be back a half mile
lane. If you're in an extreme situation, like the data has to be accurate. Like that could be a big
difference, right? You need to know where you're going and have a general layout of the land. So,
but it, but it is very helpful, you know, because there's a lot of places where there's two or three
houses back at private road and they're just not labeled very well at all.
All of these are a contribution on a big stage. These have millions of views. And that is where
the next level comes in. SEO, search engine optimization. It is a 68.27 billion dollar
industry. It determines what shows up at the top of search results. Actually, I have no idea if that
stat is true, but whoever published it has pretty good SEO. If you are a business, showing up on Street
View is a type of SEO. It doesn't just let people tour your grocery in Doha. I love this one. By the
way, here are the proud owners. And here's this guy who's just like, can I please buy something and
leave? It might also get you more cred with Google search. Google builds this up with a list of trusted
vendors. It's like in this promo video, a photographer comes in, photographs your business, and it
theoretically might up your cred with Google. This is in the interest of both the owner and the
photographer. So let's say you have an inn in the Bahamas. You might want to be able to give people a
tour of your inn so that they can see that it's nice before they book. And you are willing to hire
altavistacg.com to do it for you. In Australia, I found this realtor who did it for his neighborhood.
Awesome and kind of hilarious. Google lets you put your logo at the bottom of an image that you upload.
I could go on all day here. I love exploring these random street views and photospheres.
I want to go ahead and tell you about one, though, that I get into in more depth on my newsletter.
Let's plop us down. The mystery is what is inside this building and who
is this man? If you don't know, I have a newsletter that I publish when every video comes out.
It lets me write an article about some fascinating corner of my research that I wasn't able to get into
in the video proper. And this time it is the identity of this person and why he is in this random
building all by himself. I think you'll find it kind of interesting. The newsletter is totally free to
sign up for. It's hosted by Patreon, but it's free to sign up for the newsletter. It allows me to
communicate with you when I have a new video coming out. It lets you know what I'm doing on
Patreon in general and if I have any big plans in the future. So please go ahead and check that out.
It supports the channel. Go ahead and subscribe if you want to find out his story.
So hopefully I've proven to you by now that photographers and businesses,
they have a significant corner in the Street View world, but there is a bigger picture too.
This map of official Google Street View sites, it is kind of a proxy map for economic investment
as viewed by a company in Silicon Valley. So there are concerted efforts in the unofficial map
to represent areas to tourists. Right there. I'm just curious to find out why people are doing it.
I've probably added, I don't know, about 500 odd kilometres to Street View over the years.
18 years ago, I started a bushwalking business, which is what we call hiking in Australia,
and I started documenting bushwalks, but on a website. So I started getting all these questions
that were just difficult to answer. So my trick notes were really detailed and somebody would ask
questions like, how tall is the bridge? Because I'm scared of heights. And you go, oh, okay, interesting.
And so I started, you know, I get a bit carried away with these things. So I started looking into
things like, are there engraving systems for exposure and height and all those sort of things.
And then realized, okay, photo says 1000 words, all that sort of stuff. But the beauty of a photo is
it's not that it's the thousand words, it's that people can answer their own questions very quickly.
Right. And so I actually built my own 360 degree camera because it didn't really exist for
consumers. And so it was basically, I took four GoPros, ripped the backs off of them,
ripped the guts off them and stuck them into a camera and mounted them to a pole to my pack.
So as I walked, they'll just take photos about every five metres or 10 metres.
Wow.
And that became particularly important as we start to look into documenting walks for people
with disability. It's not just about people in wheelchairs. It's not just about if they have
steps or no steps. Um, it's about, um, all those 10,000 questions that people have,
like, what's the toilet like? Right.
Those sort of thousand questions you just can't answer.
So what Matt's doing is interesting. He does promote his business through these uploads, but
he's also just making it easier for people to go on hikes. Across the world, At Your Leisure TV,
and Chad, who I talked to, have a kind of more complex reason for mapping a ton of off-road trails
in the state. Hi, everybody. Welcome to At Your Leisure. I'm Chad Booth. I'm Maria Rossi Booth.
We just started our 23rd season. So we'd worked with the off-road community over a number of years
on areas of land access and roads on public lands. And the previous attempts at mapping,
which we had promoted and been involved with, were just off of us. So we started working with the
state and they said, well, yeah, we can do this. Uh, maybe you can get grants. And we started going to
cities and, and they could get matching funds for the grants. We got, we got a couple of retailers
to sponsor with us. We got a gas company that has truck stops all over the country. They paid for the
fuel one off-road dealer that sprung for us to get a truck and camper so the guy could stay out on the
trail that did the maps. It cost us about five to $6,000 per trail to actually do everything and
have proper insurance and clearance and pay for the equipment and the gas and the, and the editing.
Everyone I've talked to, nobody is, has been half-hearted about it. Everybody has really committed.
If you look down on the truck, you can see all these stakeholders that he's talking about.
There's the Utah DNR, which is promoting trail use so that these trails aren't closed down for
not being used enough. New Mexico tourism has uploaded a ton of images to Street View, which
makes sense because it helps them promote the state. This goes to a bigger scale too, because
countries have incentives to add Google Street View imagery. It is being mapped through basically a
community effort that is nothing less than miraculous. That is their joke, not mine. Okay.
A similar thing happened with some of the Street View imagery in Zimbabwe,
which was just uploaded to help promote the country. And there is Zanzibar.
They weren't on Google Street View until World Travel in 360 put them there for the country.
We've been in touch with the government of Zanzibar and honestly, we tried to sell them to say,
guys, Google will probably not come there, but we are a company dedicated to that. We are doing
this with you. We can do it for you. And of course, underpayment. The government of Zanzibar
said that it's a fantastic project and everything else, glad for that. And so at that moment,
we realized that probably it was a common problem in all the African countries. They say,
how we can propose the same to the other countries and find someone else that is going to pay for
the bills. Because generally in African countries, it's not easy to find a budget or something like
that. We've been in touch with the Insta360, the camera manufacturer, the cameras that are still
using to do this kind of jobs. And we talked with them and said, guys, we are going to do something
unique in the world because it was, again, it was the world's first project of its kind.
Why you don't help us? You cover the cost. We sponsorize.
So they got Insta360 to sponsor this as kind of a pilot program. People watching this might not
appreciate just the amount of organization that you have to do. And in the meantime, you're in these
places that haven't even been seen very frequently in the rest of the world.
Driving around all day is so beautiful. You go places, you meet people, you get stuck in beautiful
places. But at the end of the day, you need to deal with six terabytes of data. Then you need to stitch it.
In addition to uploading 360 degree imagery, World Travel in 360 has actually uploaded really nice
high res footage from above. You can see the difference here between the satellite imagery
that Google supplies and the lush imagery that's been provided by World Travel in 360.
This scale of advertising is fascinating, but it is not the last part of the Street View economy.
That comes in the data. This is Oklahoma right here. And if you go to the newest Street View image,
it is from somebody called BCAO. That is the Beckham County Assessor's Office. They are using Street View
for the data. They're trying to figure out values for different parts of the county. It's actually
similar to some of the surveying that's being done in Croatia here by Geogrupa. That is also the
expertise of a Finnish company called Autori. They are actually notorious amongst GeoGuessr players
because their cameras aren't quite as good as Google's. They all use Street View because it is a
platform for data about places and that is as or maybe more valuable than the advertising. And that
is why the Gambia hired Ripple Nami. And so we have a software that helps identify undeclared rental income
from landlords. And we had deployed this software in Uganda and it's been wildly successful. So the Gambia
wanted to see if they could get the system for themselves. During the demonstration, the Uganda
Revenue Authority is showing them, you know, here's all the landlords and here's where you can see
their properties. And here's where you can see the properties on Street View. And it was as if we had
landed somebody on the moon. They were like, what? They thought it was the most impressive thing that
they've ever seen. And it's a long story short, we ended up getting a contract with the Gambia
government. And so we needed a way to be able to determine through an algorithm what do we estimate
the rental value could be in every any particular area. And for the inputs of the algorithm, we need the
the area of the building and how the stories it is. And so we need how many stories it is. So let's
do 360 imagery and capture and map all the streets around Banjul and Canafim so that we for our own
project can determine the the stories of buildings to go into our algorithms to determine rate. And at
the same time, we thought, well, let's publish all this to Google so that it can benefit everybody.
Because it has so many benefits in terms of, you know, business opportunities for businesses to be
able to put themselves there on the map. Okay, so why make this video about all the little economic
corners of Street View? Street View already makes clear the little differences that make up our world.
That onramp does not look very good.
I think that looking at the economics behind Street View is another fascinating layer to add
over all of it. This brings up lots of big questions about global wealth, about tech, and even about
what makes people want to go on an adventure to a new location. I think those are really valid
questions, but I want to end this on an optimistic note. The unofficial map of Google Street View coverage,
it is a map of a bunch of people who are proud of the places where they live and who want the entire
world to see them. Should they have to do it? That is a fair question, but their work means that we should
take the time to look around and maybe look down too.
Hey, that's it for this video. Thank you for being here. A lot of people to thank. Of course,
I want to thank everyone who talked to me for this project and everyone who I played GeoGuessr with.
So there are a lot of links in the description that you can check out, a lot of channels to check out too.
And yeah, it was just interesting to kind of dig into this. There's a reaction video over on Patreon
going there, supports the channel. And I mentioned my newsletter article, which I actually think is kind
of kind of a cool mystery. So you can check that out and sign up for that for free if you want. The link
to that is in the description as well. And otherwise, I think that's it for this one. I'd love to know what
you think about this. What's your favorite find on Google Street View? Where do you think this is
going in the future? It's a fascinating thing and there's a lot there. So I'd love to know what you
think too. All right. Thanks for watching, and I will see you in the next one. Bye.
