Thank you Katie and thanks for being the agent whereby we three journalists could be embedded
here at the institute and among what 55 of the most amazing thoughtful kind people at the CSS
this past month. Let me start with the general purpose disclaimer and then I'm not going to
disclaim anymore. I'm not an expert in the fields I'll be talking about today. I'm an observer,
an outsider. I like to think I'm an informed outsider but nonetheless just take my remarks as
those of an observer to the scene as it were. So we've all talked to a lot of people this past
month or so and then prior to that in our careers about interdisciplinarity and what that
means and my observation is that often it means that physics informs other disciplines.
And I think the other direction of that the other axes of that interdisciplinary are less explored
so I'm going to try to be provocative today in that way. And physics needs foundational physics
certainly needs input from other disciplines because it has epistemic gaps essentially that
other disciplines can help fulfill. So the goal of natural science certainly of physics is to create
an objective observer kind of independent view of the world but it's an empirical science so it relies on
observations and in the middle there has to be some observer model some understanding of the observation
process such that the observations can be linked to this observer independent or objective view of the
world. And I think that's the space that the other fields can really help with is what is the observer?
Who are we? What are we? Where are we?
Physicists have known this historically. Bohr, Einstein, that whole generation talked a lot
about epistemology of their theories but I think maybe that's been kind of subsumed more in more recent
decades and I'd like to think it's being reanimated. Often physicists do talk about the observer
and that's an important part of the discipline but usually they do it based on their own intuitions
and resources without drawing in the insights from AI, from neuroscience, from philosophy of mind and other
fields. So today I'm going to talk about that under the rubric of what I've termed the inside outside
problem. So physical science seeks to do that. This is Mark Twain to look at the world
from my god's eye point of view as if that were really possible. It's not but we that's kind of
ideally what is sought. But we see it, this is from Ernst Mach, from the inside. We see the world from the
inside. We see ourselves looking out along the sofa that we're sitting on and how does that color,
how does that filter the world that we observe? Because our habits of thought, our perception,
our limited perception, our mortality, our localized status within space-time
all filter those observations or their existence filters those. So inside outside problem and it
comes up in a lot of areas of science. Quantum measurement is one that I'll focus on today.
Also time, the nature of time. I'll talk a bit about free will. Everyone's favorite minefield of a topic
I think can also be viewed through this kind of lens. But there are many other things as well and I'm
hardly the first person to talk about this. There's a good book recently on the blind spot, a bit more
polemical than my view but makes that same point. And people here, actually those areas, people here
have talked about that as well and I'm indebted to the discussions that I've had even just in the few
days I've been here and that I will continue to have in the different coming days and in my life to come.
So quantum measurement, this is the big one. When people talk about epistemology and fundamental
physics, this is usually what they're talking about, although it's not unique to the quantum
measurement problem. So I'm not assuming anyone knows about quantum physics. I'll give you my own
kind of take on it. And I should say that, actually before we do that, I should say that we communicators,
both scientists and journalists and so forth, typically describe quantum physics as the theory of
the micro world, the little stuff, particles, electrons. But it's not. The theory is a theory of all the world.
That was the whole point of the Schrodinger-Katter thought experiment, that it's not just about the
particles, it's about us and it's about humans. And we are as described by quantum theory as anything.
At least that's what the theory seems to say. But of course we don't see
those quantum effects in our daily life. And the question is why? And it's precisely that question.
Why don't we see entanglement, superpositions and all these other weird things in our daily life?
So the way I'd like to phrase or frame quantum theory is it's the human effort, the human
construct to make sense what seem like two incompatible descriptions of the world.
The particle description, the Lego-like description, that the world is made of scraps of stuff,
they're localized, they have properties like color or charge, spin, and aggregates of them derive their
properties from the properties of the parts. Then there's the continuum description of the world,
like the wave or the field description of the world, where properties aren't localized,
they're distributed in space. You can do weird things that you can't do with the particles,
you can add and subtract waves, interference.
Both of these descriptions go back to ancient times. I think Aristotle really championed that,
Democritus that. They're totally sensible ways to view the basic composition of the world.
There's nothing paradoxical about, well there actually are some paradoxes about both of them
individually but they maybe can be worked out. What the real paradox is however is that the two are
together. That a world has both of these qualities and quantum theory tries to capture that and that's
what's been blowing our minds for the past century. In fact I got a message today from CERN saying that
today was the idea that Werner Heisenberg wrote to Wolfgang Pauly about his new description of quantum mechanics.
So century to today.
This is just a little graph I created. Same system being described by
a classical particle. By the way there's nuances about what a particle is,
what a wave is. I'm collapsing all that down. Same system described in two different ways.
Here is the kind of canonical way to view that in quantum optics. I've had the privilege in the past
ten years of spending a lot of time in the laboratory doing these kinds of experiments with people
that I greatly respect such as Enrique Galvez of Colgate who's kind of miniaturized this whole system
and created a pedagogical version of it for students. So light goes in, it bounces to these
kind of prism-like thingies, the mirrors, it's a way to manipulate light. What makes it tricky
experimentally is getting all the alignments right. So it doesn't look too hard but that's why you've got
screwed things down in this kind of pegboard arrangement. This is the key element that I'll be
talking about today. The beam splitter looks like a little prism. Sometimes it can look like a little
mirror. There's different ways of doing it. It does what you think. It splits beams. You fire a laser at it
and two beams come out. There's a second beam splitter up there that if you get the alignment right,
that's the trick in these experiments, get the path lengths equal. It will recombine that beam
into one. So it's a beam unsplitter too. This is classic wave behavior like an ocean wave going around
an island. You split your wave, it can go and then maybe on the other side of the island it reunites.
Nothing strange so far. This is where it gets weird. You can take a single particle, it's actually a photon
though depicted as an atom. Fire it at the beam splitter and in some sense that is stretching our
language. It goes both ways and then the second beam splitter unsplits it again.
This is where it gets weird because you've got a particle which is supposed to be a localized scrap of
material going two ways. This is quantum superposition. I don't think we've seen that many,
not even in New Jersey, do you see a sign like that.
Okay, I call this a digression but it's actually important for the discussion
to come. How do we know? I'm a committed empiricist. I want to know how we know things.
It's not just theoretical that or I should say it is theoretical but the theory is derived from some
kind of observations why we think particles localized though they are defined as go both ways.
So imagine that the beam splitter worked like a little door. Sometimes it opened one way and the
particle went that way. Sometimes the little door would open and the particle went that way.
Seems good. The superposition in that case is just reflecting our ignorance somehow of what that little
door has done. So we hold options open. We describe it as superposition. That would be kind of what you
would think this is showing. But there is a problem because this is opening 50-50 that way or that way. That
one at the top will also open 50-50 one way or the other and you might get a situation like this.
And that's not seen. Something therefore, some interactions happening at that second beam splitter
to unite the wave, the natural wave mechanics, less so in particle mechanics but yet it's happening.
And this is why one of the reasons we think that there is a wave component to matter. It's not just
this particle with ignorance component. Okay. Now let's get into what the measurement process is.
John von Neumann wrote the first textbook of quantum mechanics, I think in the mid-1930s,
and he set up what he called the chain of events or what is in English translated as the chain.
Measurement process is a chain. Laser. It fires at that beam splitter, which I've shown here as a
little box, a little prismy thing. On each side I put a detector. I run my detector,
and that's translating the photons in this case into electrical pulses that go into my computer,
which has a display, and there is the observer looking at the whole situation.
What does quantum mechanics say will happen? And again I'm using the theory to say what will happen,
but the theory itself is based on observation. So what do other observations indicate if you
extrapolate them should happen in this case. And in each of these events it's described by a wave
equation, at least in one of the ways to talk about quantum mechanics. So the splitter infects everything
that comes beyond it. If the splitter sends the beam both ways, both the detectors will fire,
both will send a signal to the computer, and the observer sees only one of them.
There's the weirdness. We don't see mutually conflicting outcomes such as particles going
two ways. We see only one of them. This is wave function collapsed. Here it is from Quantum Magazine.
Where is Emily? Beautiful graphic from Quantum Magazine that actually depicts wave function collapse,
in this case using a position as the variable rather than path. So you've got a wave-like behavior
that upon observation collapses down. And this is kind of common, we talk about in our culture,
but just wanted to show what it means. Von Neumann therefore articulated two rules for quantum theory.
Most of the time systems have this wave-like behavior. They interfere, they go both ways,
that sort of thing. But when a conscious being looks at it, measurement is taken, you get this collapse.
Now that word conscious is playing a role here. Why? Because each step of the Von Neumann chain,
if it's just a mechanical device, like a detector, it's infected by the superposition of the previous stage.
A mechanical device therefore becomes superposed.
It doesn't collapse it. At least in textbook quantum mechanics.
Only the intervention, according to Von Neumann and
his ilk, only the intervention of the conscious being
will collapse the wave function. And that of course
has launched a thousand shifts of interpretation, because what is a conscious being doing in our fundamental physics?
You should go the other way. You should start with fundamental physics and get consciousness or
so the reductionist view would hold.
Now, I'm going to collapse down, because it's my privilege as an outsider to this discipline
to redefine things in my own way. I will take that liberty. I'm going to collapse the entire
interpretive debate down to two possibilities. Either quantum mechanics does or doesn't hold.
Okay, suppose it doesn't hold. In other words, we need to modify quantum theory
in some way to explain this role of the observer.
It might look something like this. The observer, I've changed the diagram a little bit from before,
if you're... See? Now the observer herself is in a superposition of seeing the particle, in this case, go both ways.
That's not something we directly experience, so the question is how to explain that. And the idea is that somehow
something happens to the observer.
We'll come back to that. That causes one of the options to be selected,
and depending on the setup, actually not in this particular setup, but in other setups, it might
backflow out to the system. So what's really happening here, and I should have said before,
is that in this von Neumann chain, each stage is quantum entangled. So this is a big quantum entangled
system. The fate, which means the fate of the splitter is connected or is associated with the fate of the
detector, of the computer, and of the observer's brain. So the idea is that as that, and that's kind
of a scaling up process, each of these things is bigger than what came before, so you might imagine
at some point some new physics, this post-quantum physics that we're hypothesizing intrudes,
the observer's brain collapses, no longer sees A and B, just sees A, and that affects through the
entanglement, the other parts of the system. What could that be? There's different
theories, models for what that could be. One is what's known as the GRW. The idea is that there's a
noise in nature that's beyond quantum theories, not described by quantum theory, but it's out there,
and each particle is sensitive to the noise, so the more particles you have, the more sensitivity
in the aggregate you have, and when you get to the brain level there's so much sensitivity to that
noise that it causes to collapse. Mass, this is Sir Roger Penrose's idea, independent of his ideas
about quantum consciousness I should say, or what underlies those ideas, is that there's some
gravitational instability that's created. And then a newer idea that I think is starting to come from the
interchange of disciplines that I'm suggesting physics needs, is that there's something with the
complexity of the brain that is required. And this, I don't know what you think about integrated
information theory, I'm not advocating it necessarily, but it produces a measure of complexity
that it associates with conscious states, and two philosophers, David Chalmers and Kelvin McQueen,
suggested that complexity threshold triggers collapse. So there's some post-quantum physics that the
complex system is somehow sensitive to in their postulate. But by the way, I think any of the other
complexity measures that people here and elsewhere have created should be plugged into this to see what
they do. Here I am, at Grand Sasa Laboratory, two years ago, with Catalina, how do I pronounce it?
Catalina Curciano, who works with Andrew Lobasi and others, to test these theories. They're very testable
theories. That's what's great about this option of questioning quantum mechanics, is you can test it.
I love experimental tests. So behind me, or behind us in this image, is the test they're conducting of
these spontaneous or objective collapse models as they're generically known. Because if things are
collapsing due to this noise field, due to mass instability or gravitational instability or what or
what not, or complexity or what not, it would cause radiation where there shouldn't be radiation, heat
where there shouldn't be heat, and they're looking for it. Just as a fun fact, because you go to
laboratories, you get filled with fun facts like this. Notice that that apparatus is surrounded by lead
bricks. That's to shield it from radiation with cosmic rays and what not, because you don't want that
giving you spurious radiation or heating. That's where those lead bricks came from. Does anyone
actually know where those lead bricks came from? They came from a Roman ship that was sunk in the
Mediterranean 2,000 years ago and was sitting at the bottom of the Mediterranean, working out its
radioactive decay. So the lead is no longer radioactive, perfect for these kinds of experiments. If you just
bought lead at the fishing shop or something, you couldn't do that, because the lead itself would
be radioactive. So they use this ancient long submerged lead to shield their experiments, and it's very
valuable. As soon as she's done with it, she has to give it back to Grand Sasso to use it in the next
experiment. So you would have heard, no other prizes would have been issued already if they had succeeded in
detecting this spine objective collapse. They have not, they've tried. But so far that option one doesn't
seem to be working, but they're looking for it. Catalina tells me that they're going to look at these
complexity measures as well to see whether complex systems as opposed to massive systems or big, numerically
big systems, maybe have some distinctive effect on quantum mechanics.
In lieu of experimental support, let's consider the other interpretation here. And I wish Sean Carroll
were here because this is where he would love things.
So the idea is that quantum mechanics is a valid theory of all the world. There's no size threshold,
complexity, or other threshold to it. In other words, it's describing us as much as it describes particles.
But we need to rethink, remember I said earlier, we need the observer model in between our observations
and the theory. We need to rethink the observer. That's the contention here. And the pioneer in this
thinking was Hugh Everett back in the 1950s.
Hugh Everett was kind of a problematic and tragic figure. The physics community didn't think much of
his ideas that I'll talk about now. And he ended up going to work for the US government and designed
nuclear war strategies. He actually was, he says, I don't know if it's true, he says he was the person
who figured out that the best way to win is not to play. So, Everett is known as the originator,
godfather as you will, of the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics, this
parallel universe proliferation of quantum mechanics. But his initial insight had nothing
to do with parallel universes. And if you take away nothing else from our time today, think about what
Everett was saying about the epistemology of wave function collapse. It's independent, though it maybe
leads to his ideas on parallel universes. He didn't start from parallel universities, he started from
this. He said, what was the argument that Bohr, Heisenberg, and the others gave for wave function
collapse? It went like this. We don't see systems in superposition. We don't see things in two places
at once or cats both alive and dead. Therefore, they must not be in superposition. Therefore, they must
collapse. And there's an obvious logical fallacy here. We don't know if we could see them in
superposition if they were. And if we can't even see them in superposition, that's kind of a null result
this whole logic doesn't go through. You have to ask, how would you know whether the superposition
is there or not? And the analogy, I think he gives this analogy, but I'll give the analogy anyway, is to the
Copernican revolution, Copernican cosmogony. What did Copernicus, what was his innovation here?
He went back to the logic of the Earth-centered universe and said, well, I go out to the sky,
I see planets, sun, moon, stars moving. I'm not moving. I don't see myself moving. There's no wind
or anything that would indicate that I'm moving. Therefore, I'm not moving. Therefore, I'm the
center of the universe. Fallacy here and that Copernicus identified is we wouldn't know we're
moving if we were. In fact, we are, of course, because we're stuck to the Earth. We're stuck here.
We don't detect our own motion. Therefore, the universe always looks like, it always looks like
we're center of the universe, even if we aren't. This argument doesn't go through. You get into the whole
Earth, excuse me, sun-centered and therefore uncentered cosmology. We can apply that to
this situation as well. How would the observer know, would she know, whether she's in a superposition?
She wouldn't. There's literally no observation she could conduct that would reveal that fact to her.
She has become entangled with the system. She's part of the system she's studying.
She has no outside view of it anymore.
Someone else looking in the lab would see, oh wait, she's in a superposition.
She thinks she's not. He, in this case, thinks she is. They have a different and disagreeing and
conflicting views of that same scenario. So Everett's proposition, long before he got into parallel
universes, is that measurement or collapse of the wave function is a product of the inside view.
Before she becomes entangled with the system, she's like the outside observer.
She thinks it's in a superposition. When she becomes entangled, she loses that. She goes into the
inside view and loses that. That was Everett's essential insight. And the bottom line here is
don't trust your first impressions. You need to understand how you know things. You need the
epistemology before we can make sense of this kind of situation. So, Sean Carroll and others who
adopt this kind of Everettian view love it because it takes these two rules and makes them into one.
There's no need to talk about, there's no need to bring your conscious being into your rules of quantum
mechanics. Everything, at least in one of the views of quantum mechanics, behaves like a wave.
And the collapsed measurement issue is just coming as an artifact of not properly thinking through
the epistemology of this. Now, there's lots of problems with the Everettian view as well. It's one of
these damned if you do, damned if you don't kind of situations. There's other issues with it
having to do with probabilities and such like. But one that I'll point out here is that it undermines
our notion of facts. And this is Marina, where are you? I want to talk to you about this later.
It undermines the notion of an objective fact because these two observers
have differing views of that same situation. One thinks the observer on the inside is in a superposition.
The observer on the inside thinks she's not. So that's an irreconcilable
difference of perspective between the two of them. No amount of additional data short of him also
becoming an inside observer will resolve it. So there's a sense in quantum physics that facts,
truth is perspectival. That's the term of art here. And the mini-world interpretation with the parallel
universes is one way to understand that. There's a number of other ways that go under the rubric of
epistemic views of quantum mechanics. Cubism is a well-known one to try to make sense of this
observer dependence of objective dot, at least in this kind of setting. By the way, in a popular
audience, I'm quick to say this does not undermine our knowledge of presidential election results and
climate change and whatnot. We can ascertain those, but when you get to the quantum realm, it's more nuanced
what a truth or a fact is. Sarah, I don't know where Sarah is. We had a great discussion yesterday and
today where she points out that there's actually a classical physics analog to this observer problem.
We can talk about that in Q&A if you want. Yes. Yes. Maybe I don't understand the inside problem.
What is the inside observer? The inside observer is conscious, but what is she observing and why hasn't
it collapsed? Right. Oh, it has collapsed for her. So imagine the experiment is proceeding. The laser's
firing, the beam splitter's splitting, the detector's detecting, the computer's computing. Then she enters
that she sees something on the screen. Quantum mechanics, the theory, tells you that she would
therefore see both A and B. In other words, the particle having gone on both paths. So there's no
collapse. The question is why does she subjectively perceive the collapse? Okay, hang on a second. And
that comes from this idea that there's no observation she could make on her own state to perceive that collapse.
Hang on. Let's go back here and then Jeff. Why don't we require an experiment in the first case
when we have a computer which is essentially making the act of making a measurement? I mean,
in my understanding, the class of the way function doesn't have to be due to anybody. I mean, it's just
due to an interaction with the system. This is what I'm questioning. I mean, I'm just saying why
we need an observer, but here it's making the same intelligence. Good. In the Apparedian view,
you don't. In the Apparedian view, the second option, indeed, the observer is
like playing the same role as the computer and on the other pieces of the apparatus.
She's going into a superposition of mental states, having observed A or B, just as much as the computer
is in a superposition of logic states presenting A and B. The difficulty is, is that just experiential.
When we conduct this experiment, I've done it, you get one answer out of it. You perceive one answer,
even though the theory is telling you you should see a superposition. It's like opening the Schrodinger
cat box and seeing a live or a dead cat. The theory says you should see an alive dead cat.
Sure, but the computer is reading that same information too. Right. So the computer is doing
the analogous thing. Exactly. So the question at hand is, do you need, is the observer treated
differently from other systems in nature? So people who...
Yes. And then you could then, if you want to bring people into it, they come and look at that.
Now, how do you describe that situation? What is looking... Because the computer has something,
it's fixed, that's a memory, point, and you look at the two of them, aren't you? Then there's no
ambiguism. Right. The question is, what is a measurement? Well, isn't that a measurement?
The measurement, it means... What does a measurement mean?
Well, a detector at CERN takes a measurement. Right.
And there's no human being involved in the actual measurement. And then they look at the print now.
That's it. There actually are human beings of all that. We just hide them in our,
in our papers and so forth. The point here is that a measurement means entanglement with that
system. Measurement is an interaction. It's a physical process. You don't just measure things,
stand outside them and measure them. You have to actively become part of the system
that you're measuring. That action of becoming tangled or becoming part of the system is filtering
your view of the system. That's the proposition that Everett had.
Before human beings, poor consciousness arose. Describe consequences.
Yes, excellent. This Everett view is popular among the likes of Sean Carroll and other cosmologists,
Jim Hartle. He has a version of it. Precisely because it doesn't treat the observer any differently
from other systems. Those cosmologists... Which is?
I should say there are multiple ways to understand this epistemology of the observer. One way,
the wit, was many worlds interpretation. That these two observers, A and B, what does it mean for her to
have this dissociative state of seeing A and B? In the many worlds interpretation, it means that there's an A
B observer and a B observer in disjoint worlds. That's the many worlds. But there are other ways
to do it as well. One might have... I mean, cubism, there's like a kind of an epistemic argument that
doesn't commit itself to other worlds in there. By the way, this is a place where, please, the neuroscientists,
philosophers of mine, and so forth need to help the physicists. The physicists are struggling with this.
Who was next? I think you were, and then we'll come around.
Well, can I answer that question?
I mean, so you presented right nicely, like according to, for Newman, the computer is not
conscious, therefore it can't collapse, right? Then you presented that with other options, like
the computer maybe doesn't have enough math so it doesn't collapse. So it's not complex enough and it
doesn't collapse. Or it could be that it is complex enough that doesn't collapse. So it could be,
the question is, who can, if there is a collapse, who can collapse? And it's different theories put
within different places. And the theory that we then present is one theory where there is no collapse.
So then it doesn't matter. The computer is in superposition, the observer is in superposition,
and the superobserver. There's never a collapse. But doesn't that produce some infinite regress of
people in superposition with everything? And I'm not sure how that makes good predictions.
It does. Yes, it does. When there's a physical interaction. The way I'm talking about the
superobserver at the moment is he's not physically interacting yet with the observer. But when he does,
he becomes one part of the system. Like the sun shoots photons and things and interacts with it,
so like everything is essentially you're saying observing. Yep. So what makes people different?
Nothing. And this, I'm sorry, I wasn't very clear on it earlier, and thanks for clarifying.
There's two, there's a fork on the road. You can take the fork that observers are different,
or the fork that they aren't different. This is the aren't different one.
I understand. So when you talk to like David Wallace and other proponents of the many worlds view,
who think about this in terms of many worlds, they have a kind of a theory, or at least some kind of
sketch view of what it, precisely what you're saying, what do you mean? There would be an expanding
light cone, you know, out of this kind of entanglement process. So yes, in that sense, a world,
one of the branches of the many worlds, is constructed by a chain of physical interactions
expanding out with the speed of light, precisely as you say. Andromeda doesn't partake in that yet,
but we wait a few million years or whatever, and they will be part of that. Thank you.
Yeah, so there's a, there's a philosophical concept here that I wonder why isn't taking
long of my statements, which is to say we have a quantum mechanics that predicts
outcomes of new experiments, albeit probabilistically, allows us to build things,
this allows us to, you know, reconcile lots of physical things. Why isn't all of this just
kicked to something that's not knowable, right? To just say, this is a, this is, like, we can never
measure the super observer. So why don't we just kick that to a part of the epistemology we can't
access, and say the quantum mechanics we have are all practical purposes, done with the things we want.
And then there are these weird, those awful issues that maybe we can't vet it or know or resolve.
What does the universe sit in? Yeah. Who knows? That's a hard question. Like, these are all
maybe not a better thing. So the, an option would be, we don't know. So yeah, I guess there should
be a third option. I mean, the, the physicists, the natural scientists, I think we all in general
bristle with that. We want to know, right? We, we think we have the mental capacity, and there's a question of
whether we do, to know this. I will say that there is a line of argument that I've
collapsed unfairly, perhaps, into this point of view. The pragmatist interpretation. Richard Healy
at Arizona, I think he's no longer at Arizona. He's moved to Spain on his retirement. But he advocated
this pragmatist view, which is basically saying what you're saying. We don't know. We know that the theory
works is pragmatic, but we don't know why. Let's bracket that question. And I think, I think he would
argue that, you know, maybe a successor theory to quantum mechanics like a unification of physics
would bring an answer to that. Steve Nadler at Princeton or IAS also thinks that there needs to
be a successor theory. And I think that's actually probably the progress of physics. We never understood
Maxwellian electrodynamics till we got QED. We didn't understand that till we had the standard model.
There's always a sense in which we're playing catch-up to the understanding of our theories.
Then you need to come to my office after this talk. We're going to log on to the IBM cloud
computer and we will show quantum computing works. Okay, we'll talk about that one later.
I completely disagree with you on quantum computer and I can't wait to show you a quantum computer
that works. It's awesome. It is true. I mean, an amazing thing is, of course, 99.9%
take your view, the practical view, right? The theory of work, you have a theory is well-defined,
you can know the algorithm, have a calculator, you can calculate some things to 13 decimates.
Yeah, yeah. And it works extremely well and you can incorporate it too. Not that there isn't a
philosophical interpretation. So, you know, it's... You can calculate your spectrum of the hydrogen,
that's obviously something you do. But you can calculate this.
Yes, you can calculate the way it's a series of algebra.
Oh, you know what I mean?
You can calculate it if you have those von Neumann rules. This is where you're taking your textbook...
Well, yes. You don't have to look the way it's a series of algebra.
Okay. It's upon measurement, but then you have... You can take out the word... You can take out the
phrase by conscious being, but then you're left with explaining to me what a measurement is.
Yeah, well, the measurement is like that laptop.
And the laptop goes into superposition, but I don't see it. That's the problem that we have here.
So, if that... If that observer is isolated from the rest of the world, that apparel would be in a
superposition from the point of view of a super observer. And that's weird because the observer...
We never have superposition-like experiences, but the theory says that we should. So, what's going on?
That seems to be the puzzle.
But, you know, to me, it seems that the collapses happened at detector A and detector B. Each detector
is emitting, finally, a classical click, which it is communicating to the computer.
So, the computer has nothing to do with it or the observer. It's the... You know, the stuff is
really happening at the detectors. One of the detectors clicks, and that's the collapse.
So, how do you know this? How do you know that you've localized the collapse to that detector?
So, we know that one of the detectors clicks. And after that, what happens is easily understandable.
You know, there is an electrical signal, the click, that goes to the computer. And the computer
registers the click from one source or the other. The observer just sees that. So, all the...
The interesting stuff has happened before.
But if you make the detector carefully enough, you can detect that the detector is in superposition.
So, it's not... I mean, only if the detector is big enough, we will not see it.
Yeah. So, we are talking about big enough detectors which image classically clicks.
But they can detect this question. Is the detector quite mechanical?
Right. Or not? Or is it... Is H small?
Right. But that would be the same question.
Like, if the complex another, there may not be...
Right. Yes. But the problem is at the level of the detector, and it stops them.
Right. It doesn't propagate. I mean, there's no puzzle propagating beyond the detector.
But you have just told me... Conscious observer.
You just told me something that violates the Schrodinger equation in that process.
That's the trouble. Because the Schrodinger equation has no size threshold in it.
We can put one in. We can do that. But that's not Schrodinger.
Both these wavelengths, though, basically go to zeros.
Basically, it's not good enough.
It's a technique, by definition, manual detector.
You can't register any effects with...
If it's a Brodinger wavelength, it's so low, there should we measure no fun.
It doesn't have a...
You shouldn't use a quantum detector to detect it.
I guess you have so many more things to show up.
I do. This is an awesome discussion, and let's have it later.
Yours continue.
I'm actually sort of done with the quantum stuff.
And I wanted to say...
I think that the time will permit...
Time will permit only one more example of the inside-outside problem.
And I think it's a cool one, which is time.
So we're shifting gears to understanding what is time.
And this is time according to our physical theories,
according to a physicalist kind of worldview.
That all the times are there.
There's no present moment.
There's no directionality, even, built into fundamental physics, at least.
And there's certainly no flow.
There's no present moment.
So where does all the phenomenology of time come from?
And the proposition, as I've trailed, is that it's an inside-outside kind of situation.
Now, let me just pause for a moment to talk about why do we...
Why do physicists and philosophers of physics think in a block universe way?
And there's different kind of philosophical, logical, and relativistic arguments for that.
One is that every moment feels like the present.
So if every moment feels like the present, there's no preferred present.
Another comes from special relativity, where there's no preferred present there.
It's observer-dependent.
And then what's less talked about, but equally important, is that general relativity doesn't...
And one of the kind of essential principles of general relativity is that there's no outside to the universe.
There's no absolute structure.
And this goes into the understanding of gravity.
And therefore, there's no way to pin times to places in spacetime.
Anyway, there's a number of reasons to think of the block universe, but wildly at odds with our direct experience.
So how do we reconcile that?
So there's a line of thinking that goes back, actually goes back to Einstein, but really developed more in the 50s.
And the Carlo Rovelli is the big promoter of today that we should think of time relationally or correlationally.
So here's a schematic toy sketch of the outside view where we have things in the universe, processes that are related to one another.
So the heart beats one per 86,400th of a day or whatever that is, and there's a mechanical clock and all these processes.
I'm blurring over a lot here, by the way, philosophically, just bear with me.
Processes are interrelated, no time.
Why time?
And this is Carlo's argument that we can't keep track of all these correlations.
We're just little creatures localized in space and time.
We cannot possibly process and comprehend all those different correlations that occur in nature.
We conventionally introduce time to do the work for us.
So we think that there's time and those processes are changing in time.
But time has no reality beyond that kind of construction, at least in this view.
The comparison I make is, do you think of time as like cash, like currency?
In principle, we could just conduct barter transactions, right?
We just move physical goods from one person or one economic agent to the other.
But that's hard.
We have no kind of common or standard of value for that.
Therefore, we have money introduced and money and time are kind of playing this common currency role.
Kind of time is money.
I guess you could actually say that.
I didn't even thought that about before.
So back in the, I guess, early 80s, two physicists on page, Bill Wooters, kind of
put together this model of what that kind of correlational
kind of meaning might be and how you might understand the inside to outside view.
Here is the inside view.
The clock is turning and the Earth is spinning.
And I don't think I've got those properly aligned with each other.
But we have different systems in nature and they are changing in time or cycling in time.
The inside, excuse me, the outside view is that this is a Schrodinger clock.
It tells all times at once.
This is a Schrodinger planet.
It is in all orientations relative to the sun at once.
And it looks blurred in this kind of view.
So let's kind of expand it a little bit.
And we might think that all, and this is sort of like Schrodinger-Pat kind of situation,
except we're doing with clocks and planets.
All the times are present in our description.
And all the planet orientations are present in the description.
And they're correlated.
They're quantum entangled.
So when it's noon on that clock, it's noon in, what did I say?
Singapore or whatever that is.
And when it's 3am, it is actually, I guess, midnight.
I don't know what my times are.
Anyway, the times are matched up such that the clock and the Earth
are in the orientation that we expect them to be.
This gives you an outside view of the situation.
The embedded observer, seeing a time on a clock, will know that the Earth has to be in that position.
But from the God's view, if there were one, all the times are present at once.
So this is a way to get time out of a timeless system.
This has actually been tested experimentally.
I love experiments.
I love them.
This has been tested by another Italian group where they did an inside and outside view using that same kind of model.
So from the outside view, time is parameterized by capital T.
System, the quantum state is just in that superposition, stays in that superposition.
There's no change.
But on the inside view, time is parameterized by tau.
And you do get what in that experiment is the proper kind of dependence on time.
So I went through that quickly, but the point being is that this puzzle of time,
it's puzzling because physical time and experiential time don't seem to connect.
They're very different.
And there's also puzzles within physics about what time is, how there can be change in the world,
even though our basic theories such as relativity or quantum gravity tell us there's actually no sense of time.
Okay.
I have a whole chart that I put together about this, but we can come to that later.
And I'm going to skip free will.
We can talk about free will later, because free will is fun.
I love it.
But just to kind of, I want to reprise this slide.
And I think my point I've been making is that some of the puzzles we have in fundamental physics
can be traced back to not thinking properly through what observers do.
And I hope that the actual people who are experts in observation, people who work on AI or on,
to the extent AI is telling us about observerhood, who work on neuroscience,
philosophy of mind certainly can weigh in on these questions,
because goodness knows the physicists need that help.
Thank you very much.
