Does anyone remember where they were when the first season of Stranger Things came out?
Do you remember the initial word of mouth spread for a previously unknown spooky little TV show
set in the 80s? I remember exactly where I was. I was at a family friend's house where after
walking in asking, um, oh, what's this you've put on? They say, um, oh, it's just a, it's just a
called, it's called a Stranger, Stranger Things. And I go, oh, all right. I guess, I guess we'll,
watch it, give it a go. Uh, whatever. And then the credits started.
We ended up watching the, uh, the entire thing in one day. I'm pretty sure. Now this family
friend's house was the kind of house that has just slightly better everything. You know,
the sofa was larger. They had a nice kitchen. They had a bigger TV. And most importantly,
they had Netflix. This is back before Netflix was like a staple on most televisions. Okay.
Every time we visited this family friend's house, we'd eventually have to go back with, uh, our
horrible sofa, our tiny little kitchen, and our old TV with no Netflix on it. Yes, that's right.
For the formative years of my childhood, I grew up just like Rishi Sunak. Famously,
Sky TV. So that was something that we never had growing up. I'm old enough to have had a childhood
where the TV and the Wi-Fi were two separate things. But still, that never stopped me from
watching things. You don't know how many f***ing DVDs I owned, okay? How many DVDs I went out and
bought. If I heard about like a film or a show that I really wanted to watch, you'd either have to go to
a shop and buy the DVD, or you'd have to order it on Amazon and then wait like a week for it to show
up. Sweet, sweet memories of waiting for my Buffy season one DVD to show up and then, you know, being
met with this.
No! I won't go back!
No!
Come on!
With all this in mind, you have to understand what it was like to have such an abundance of film and
television at your fingertips. We as a family eventually got a new TV that had Netflix on it
around 2017, so kind of late into the game. And look, the remote even has a Netflix button on it.
Little did I know that in the current day, whenever I now look at the same Netflix button,
I'm filled with dread, anguish for what Netflix has become. The broken promise, the hubris.
There was a bit of a Netflix sweet spot in the 2010s when, you know, Disney hadn't taken off its
programming. There was a list of this kind of sectioning off and exclusivity that we have now
with Disney Plus and Paramount Plus and HBO or whatever. It seems that the people behind Netflix
at the time knew that eventually this would be our reality. So essentially, you know, Netflix were
the first prospectors in a kind of media gold rush.
With streaming, we can bring you a much different and much better experience than what you get when
watching traditional television, downloading a movie or even playing a DVD. Streaming means that
it's entirely on demand and always ready to watch instantly on virtually any device that connects to
the internet. Netflix streaming puts you in full control. You can even pause, fast forward or rewind
as you see fit. So give Netflix a try and enjoy your favorite shows and movies entirely on your
schedule. The main thing that was so good about the new streaming system was the newfound
convenience. Gone are the days of, you know, stacked up DVDs and scratched up discs and waiting for a
show to be repeated on broadcast. No, you can watch whatever you want, whenever you want, wherever
you want, for however long you want. In other words, I can watch Gilmore Girls until 3am and now I can
stop me. Around 2013, Netflix started producing their own original content because they were
worried about the longevity of having to pay for the licensing of everything on their platform in
case, you know, the office or friends was just yanked off their platform and they needed something
else to fall back on. That initial first round of Netflix original shows was basically just put in
place so that more people would have a reason to subscribe to their service. It was just a little
bit more exclusive. So essentially, you want your original content to match the value of your
subscription cost. As a basic principle, you want it to be worth it. If a Netflix original show gets
talked about enough through word of mouth, you're going to have more and more curious people, you know,
subscribing to your service to check it out. A show like Orange is the New Black, for example, there is so much
soul and amazing character working that show. Like, I really love the show. It's one of my favourite
shows and I'm just glad that Netflix originally took a risk and made it and made it well. I think it was
just cool of Netflix to start a brand of content based immediately on artistic integrity and trusting
the people behind it. I think that's really cool. And then Netflix, of course, started making money
money and then it all flow out the window. This is a bowling ball and this is a cake.
What?
So in recent years, the whole Netflix brand has become a bit of a joke. Like, everyone's kind of
over them now. They're kind of the super villains of the industry, but like, not good super villains,
just super villains that keep making really bad decisions and cancelling shows. Basically,
they used to be cool, but now they're not. The second season of Russian Doll just premiered on
Netflix and two things you definitely want to be associated with right now are Russia and Netflix.
Obviously, Netflix in terms of company success are doing very well. They have a lot of money.
Maybe they're doing too well. Maybe they're getting too powerful. Honestly, they're like Palpatine where
it's like, he's still dangerous to be kept alive. I feel like if you just went up to someone in the
street and asked like, what's your opinion on Netflix? They would just go, oof.
Cakes that look like everyday objects.
Okay, but why is it like this? Like, how did we get here? How did this start? Is Netflix's bad
decision making the cause or an effect of the state of the industry? And who is making these decisions?
Honestly, I spent an embarrassingly long time trying to write this video as like a cohesive
video essay, one long thing. It's just so hard. There's so much to talk about. So I have made this
into a list. A list of the reasons why Netflix is bad. Number one, dwindling of the original vision.
When I say the original vision, I mean the vision of the creative people behind Netflix, the people
behind the Netflix originals. Because of course, the vision of the executives is very different. You
know, their vision mostly consists of whatever's on a graph and, hmm, yeah, some profit and did we
pass quota this quarter? And I don't know. I've never been an executive. I don't know what it's
like. We're talking about the creative workforce. I'm sure their initial vision was very wide-eyed
and bright and excited for the future of Netflix.
Our goal is to deliver a compelling, affordable, and easy-to-use service that you'll want as one of
your entertainment options. So if you keep watching, we'll keep adding more of what you love.
Netflix was making a lot of promises to creative people and kind of selling Netflix as a kind of
new way of doing things separate from the Hollywood-dominated industry. You know, if you're a
creative person working in the television industry at the forefront of something new like this, you're
going to try and do the best you can. You're going to try and make the best product that you can to
try and be the change that you've always wanted to see in the industry. I went into the Netflix
building. I sat with the president of Netflix and I said, I want to make history. And that's
what this is. A lot of the people brought onto Netflix were already people that were kind of
screwed over by the industry. So they expected things to be a bit different. You know, initially
in the Netflix originals, you had like Genji Cohen and Baz Luhrmann. There were Chowsticky
sisters, David Fincher. Gilmore Girls was coming back for a new special or whatever.
So I'm sure a lot of them went into Netflix expecting things to be different.
It's very easy to romanticise this idea of early Netflix, you know, before everything went
downhill. The good old days. But I don't think it's necessarily important to paint this picture
of Netflix being in conflict with, with the corporate and the creative side, because that's
a battle that's been going on in the industry since like, since the beginning. I think it's
an inherent part of the industry that you can't escape. So maybe Netflix isn't that different
after all. Okay. So I think it might be best if we start putting some faces to the, the ideology
that I'm trying to explain right now. Next. Number two, under new management. This is probably
going to be the lengthiest section of the video. Like this is the bit that I'm personally like
really invested in. I'm surprised there hasn't been any drama videos about this. Okay. Okay. So
there are multiple characters in the Netflix behind the scenes landscape. First is the original
chief content officer turned CEO, eventually Ted Sarandos, who to me just seems like a bit of a
strange person. And he looks like a character from succession. He looks like the type of person
that Logan Roy would shout at, you know, Ted Sarandos to me seems like a very basic, you know,
CEO character. There's not that much special with him. He is trailblazer Ted Sarandos, chief content
officer for Netflix, who single handedly is catapulting Hollywood into the future, giving birth to the
binge watch. Digital streamer now turned big budget studio doesn't play by industry rule. Back when
Netflix was, you know, building a foundation with their Netflix originals, a face that just keeps
popping up everywhere in like all the photos behind the scenes and the premieres with the showrunners
was the VP of original content, Cindy Holland. Cindy was behind all of Netflix's best shows,
you know, all of Netflix's W's. She was behind like Stranger Things and Sense8 and all the Marvel
shows and House of Cards and BoJack Horseman and Grace and Frankie, Russian Doll. Most importantly,
she was in the trenches making Orange is the New Black back when, you know, no one knew that it was
really going to work out. They were just kind of taking a risk. And honestly, I think that deserves
some respect. Look at her. She knows she's cool. She's like, yeah, the first show I did was a highly
explicit lesbian prison drama. What about it? What's wrong? What, too cool for you? I get the feeling
that Cindy was the one behind the scenes kind of creating this feeling of creative freedom. She
seems to have had a lot of close relationships with the people behind the scenes of the shows
that she oversaw. And she's there hugging the people in Orange is the New Black and at the very
beginning, she's almost like a kind of cool teacher. Guys, I know you might be scared that I'm the chief
content officer here at Netflix, but honestly, just call me Cindy, you know, I'm your friend. You know,
just like, just chill out, man. I'm Cindy. In loads of clips where Cindy is explaining the original
vision for Netflix, the point of creative freedom and having a positive work environment comes up a
lot. Bringing in really, you know, big names and the idea of total freedom can be problematic.
You know, we want to entertain the world, so we need to have a lot of artists come join us.
From the very beginning, we wanted to create an environment that was freeing and not stifling.
Hire smart people, you give them the right support, and then you, you know, let them do their work.
And I think a lot of the industry operates in a culture of fear, and we don't. Yeah. So we're not
afraid to try a bunch of different things, some of which may work, some of which may not. If David
Fincher and Jenji Cohen didn't have a good experience with us on their first shows, they wouldn't have
come back for more, but they both have, right? One of the things I'm most proud of is that we've
created, I think, one of the best working environments for artists in Hollywood. The fact
that Natasha Lyonne is also in this clip is a complete coincidence. Like, wherever Netflix is,
Natasha Lyonne is, you know, that's just a fact of life. Okay, so the vision that Cindy laid out in
that clip from 2018 seemed like the kind of vision you'd want someone in charge of TV to have. And not
only does Cindy have the vision, she has the goods to back it up. Like, look at all the shows that she
made. They're just, it's really good. Just ignore this one photo yet. Like, don't, don't look at that
one, okay? Don't look at that one. Don't look at it. Stop looking at it. No, what are you doing?
Don't look at it. There's also a moment in this video where Cindy explains that, you know, with
Netflix's streaming model, you can cater to people's natural, eclectic taste in what they watch.
You know, stemming from the DVD service, we had 100,000 titles on DVD. And what you learn from that
when you have a catalogue of foreign films and indie films and documentaries and not just what
traditional Hollywood makes, you know, you realise that people have really diverse and eclectic tastes
and you can programme to those. People don't watch the same thing over and over again. They watch all
sorts of stuff. So being creative is important. And there's no point as a studio to make the same
thing over and over again. Right? Right? A bit of foreshadowing there for you. Want a bit of that?
You want a bit of that foreshadowing? There you go. Okay, so since 2013, Ted and Cindy have been the
dream team behind all your favourite shows. But a really pivotal point in Netflix's history came
in 2020 when they had, like, records amount of growth. And it makes sense. It's the pandemic.
Everyone's at home, you know, with nothing better to do, you know, watching TV, um, watching, um,
Tiger King. Tiger King is, yeah, I don't know. Time is an illusion. There was a really big culture
shift at Netflix as they realised with these, you know, rising, growing numbers how powerful they
really were. Netflix were just, you know, at the top of the world. And Ted Sarandos, who I mentioned
earlier as being the chief content officer of Netflix working alongside Cindy Holland, was in
July 2020 promoted and named the co-CEO of Netflix. And like two months after that in September, for
whatever reason, Cindy Holland was ousted.
Cindy was seemingly replaced with our next character in this story, Bella Bergeria, who
is the new chief content officer of Netflix. Basically, she runs this town. Nothing gets
made nowadays without Bella knowing about it. At the time, the sudden switchover and firing of
Holland was reported as being a huge turning point for Netflix. And I think that turning point is
widely reflected in the content that they're making nowadays. All you have to do is compare the shows
that Bella and Cindy have worked on. You know, there is a clear dip in quality. And just the vibes are
off, okay? The vibes are off. There is something about Bella Bergeria which irks me. I don't know what it
is. Maybe it's the fact that I know deep down subconsciously that she's worked on these horrible
shows. And I don't know, she has a very California energy, which I would describe as like Trisha
Peter's voice. She has that mmm going on, you know. She has that mmm, mmm.
At one time, I was fired. And that was really confusing because I'd had success in the job.
And it was an incredibly difficult time. But it taught me so much. And it didn't break me.
It actually led me to this job, which I have. And look, as funny as this all is, I don't want to
make this about pitting two women against each other. I don't want to do that. The industry does
that quite a lot already. I just think it's interesting how these two women have such
different ways of doing the same job. The change in leadership kind of signals a change in Netflix's
overall work ethic. There's one article from The Hollywood Reporter which I think perfectly sums up
this situation by describing it as the beginning of the Walmartization of Netflix. That sounds like
a video essay title. The Walmartization of Netflix. This particular article is very good at detailing
the ins and outs of the 2020 shift at Netflix. And the article claims to have interviewed top creators
and insiders, which I take with a grain of salt. You know, this is all alleged. Okay, I'm just going to
read from the article now. The sources say that Holland was the one who nurtured strong relationships
with talent and took time to offer thoughtful development notes while still making people
feel safe and supported in pursuing their passion projects. That service was built on the back of
Cindy Hahn's taste, says one. I could give you a list of names of people who would lie down on
railroad tracks for her. Ted is a fan of content, not a picker. I have a strong dislike for the word
content. I'm not going to lie. It's kind of robotic and it kind of cheapens what it is, you know,
content. I can't wait to consume content. It's like on social media when they call it a feed,
like it's, uh, feed me content. I must be fed. It's like we're a bunch of winking pigs, you know,
waiting for the slop. Yes, thank you for another season of never have I ever and barbecue showdown.
Yes, I must consume. A former insider says Sarandos' volume strategy began to prove destructive
to the culture and the quality of the service's offerings. Ted is great at managing growth,
but the company hit a phase where they needed to be managed differently. Whether Holland's
spendy approach itself would have proved sustainable is a question, but several creators believe
Netflix lost much of its early cachet by over-rotating to less expensive, less curated,
and less compelling, or the company might say broader fare. Now this article goes on to explain
a bit more the kind of ever-expanding nature of Netflix's original content and kind of explains
that in 2016, both Cindy and Bella were working in the original content, but Bella was managing the
foreign language side of the television, whereas Cindy was working on the main English side of things.
But slowly, Bella started dipping her toes into Cindy's pool. She apparently greenlit the now
infamous show starring Debbie Ryan, a callback to earlier I guess, called Insatiable. If you don't
know, Insatiable was a 2017 Netflix original where Debbie Ryan played a plus-size high school girl
who, you know, after losing all her weight because, um, well in the show they say that her jaw was
wired shut, so she couldn't eat anything, so that's how she lost weight, apparently, that's just like-
that's- that's crazy, that was the storyline. I looked into it, that was- that was the storyline.
Having my jaw wired shut lost me more than just my summer vacation.
It's a horrible show, it's just bad. I mean, Debbie Ryan in a fat suit, like, for the first episode,
it genuinely reminds me of something that Shane Dawson would have made in his- in his peak.
It smells like bacon.
Anyway, the point is that Cindy Holland and her team at the time passed on- on Insatiable. They
didn't want to make it, they were like, no, that looks bad, not making that, sorry. But then Bella,
behind Cindy and everyone's back, was like, no, we're gonna make this show. Don't worry, Debbie,
we're gonna make your really bad show. Because that's what Netflix is all about. You know,
I walked into the, uh, the Netflix office and sat down with the president of Netflix, I said,
I'm gonna make a horrible show. And that's what this is. I don't want to sound judgmental,
but I'm gonna sound judgmental. What was Bella thinking? Like, there's a- there's a clear
division in taste level here. It's called the Insatiable Gate within the halls of Netflix,
this source says. It gave the power of greenlight to several people. It caused absolute demoralization
and chaos. Everybody thought it was a terrible thing that Ted did, allowing one team to greenlight
something that another team had passed on. Ted, wanting to increase content by a huge amount,
started to look to Bella as what the company should be. Cindy kept saying we should still be
betting on high-end creators and making some cheap things too. As Holland expressed unhappiness with
the broader strategy, an insider says that the response was that things would work out fine if
maybe one in ten shows worked. This is one of the things that Cindy and Ted disagreed on for a
while, this person says. See, I think the biggest thing that this change in leadership signals is
Netflix's attitude towards the corporate buzzword of growth. Number three, growth. Like I said,
in 2020, Netflix had records amount of growth. And when confronted with record-breaking growth,
Netflix's goal as a company with their original content goes from, you know, making the best thing
you can with really respected creators to global domination. The creation of Netflix's content used
to be split between global non-English and English programming. That's why Cindy and Bella were
working at the same time. Now that Cindy is gone, Bella just has free reign over global TV. She's known
as the head of global TV and Netflix because her domain is the entire world. And in all of the clips
that I see of Bella, she is talking about spreading Netflix's influence all across the world.
When it comes to global ambition, Netflix is clearly ahead of the competition.
Latin America has had a rich history of storytelling. So many great movies and TV shows and there's great
creative ecosystem there. And what's been great is just to see it continue to grow. Taking these big
swings and having these ambitious, you know, productions and really being able to expand that kind
of storytelling is really exciting. And look, I love that, you know, giving people across the
world jobs. But when your focus becomes, you know, having as many productions across the world as
possible, because money, the emphasis on quality is of course lost. It's such a classic thing to say
quality and not quantity, but honestly, it just bears repeating. Like Netflix, look at that and they go,
guys, I don't know what to do right now. What's this? What does it mean? This is not to say that Netflix
hasn't made any good programs since 2020. That's obviously not true. Like look at like Bridgerton and
this isn't even meant to be a joke. I just genuinely can't remember. I can't remember any programs that
they made, um, baby, baby reindeer, squid game. They did squid game. Yes. My title is head of global
TV. And people often ask me, how do you know when you have a global hit like squid game? We didn't
know the squid game would be the most watched TV series in the world, not just for us, for anybody,
like the biggest series in the world. And there's no way that anyone could have predicted that on a
personal level. I want you to know if Bella had any more to bring to this conversation. Like I want
to know what she had to say. So I looked more into it and found this one, a New Yorker article.
The article is called how much Netflix can the world absorb? Bella Bejeria, who oversees the
streaming giant's hyper-aggressive approach to TV making says success is about recognizing that
people like having more. No, Bella, no, it's the wrong outlook to have. No, stop force feeding me
fucking garbage. No, no, I can't explain how infuriating it is to hear that. You know, people,
people, people like having more. No, I don't know.
Honestly, flicking through Netflix right now and trying to find something to watch is just so hard.
Like there's so many options. There's so much content. Good luck trying to quickly decide what
to watch while you're trying to eat something. You know, the amount of times I've tried to find
something to watch while I have something in front of me to eat. And then by the time I actually find
something, my dinner is just cold. I just give up and put YouTube on. That's what I do.
There's one particular part of this article that I find quite haunting. At some point,
Bella does start talking about Cindy. Some of Cindy's shows are tough. People made them for
prestige and for their friends, she said. Bejeria's team more readily embraced the company's new
objective, the executive said. Not only to compete with cable, but to replace all television.
Okay, I was not being hyperbolic before when I said that Netflix's new strategy is just global
domination. They've just flat out said it now. And what she means by that is Netflix not only wants
to keep doing what they've been doing for years, but also wants to replicate all the aspects of the
pre-established television industry. Like all the aspects. The reality shows, the game shows,
the drama, the foreign language programming, even the really bad channel filler that you'd see on like
a Wednesday afternoon. It's really strange to me how, you know, Netflix is easily like the biggest
shift in the industry that we've seen for a while. Like when they came around, everything changed.
And they're so big and successful that they have the power to change the industry. Like they really
do. They can, you know, do something completely different, start a new trend and just completely
change the industry for the better. But they choose to do everything again. I think they're
forgetting that shows like The Floor is Lava would only exist on the traditional television
structure to fill gaps in the schedule, take up as much airtime as possible. That's why a lot of game
shows have like 3,000 episodes because they're just there to fill up airtime. But no, Netflix wanna,
they wanna recreate that. Bella Bajiria sees that. She goes, yeah, I wanna be like that.
It's the hottest game show in history.
It's very ironic because also in this article, there's a description of what Bella is wearing
and what she wears quite a lot, which is a kind of bejeweled blazer with the term art is truth
written on the pocket. Art is truth. Art is truth. Oh, that's so powerful. Wow. Art, art, art, art.
Just the hebris of it all to imply that Netflix has the power to replace all television whilst
also wearing a blazer that lets everyone know that I'm an artist. Like, well done, Bella. Well done.
Good job. Netflix have kind of fell into this trap that a lot of companies go through where everything
that used to make them special has kind of gone out the window in order for company growth. The
corporate idea of growth means that all you're really trying to do is just make a line on a chart go up.
Even if you're already at the top, you still, you need to have the growth. Netflix actually had so
much growth and expansion in 2020 that it seemed at one point, a couple of years later, they kind of
hit a ceiling of their subscriber numbers. Now, Netflix are notoriously secretive about their
analytics and numbers. But what we do know is that in 2022, Netflix for the first time actually
lost subscribers. They lost about a million. And of course, Netflix did the obvious thing where they
don't take accountability for anything. They literally just blame everyone else. Oh, did you
forget that there was a war in Ukraine? That's why we lost subscribers. Actually, no, it was it was the
password sharing and the economy as well. It's not our fault. It's everyone else. But the reality is is
that Netflix doesn't really have that much more room to grow. They already have a massive subscriber
base. So Netflix now have no choice because they've hit the top of their subscriber base. They have to
spread out into new business ventures. Four, business ventures and expansions. Did I change
settings? Yes. Am I sat in my bed? Yes. Is it more comfortable? Yes. Are we going to talk about it
anymore? No. Get over it. It's my YouTube channel. This section is probably going to be like the most
embarrassing look for Netflix because I mean, it's kind of cringe, isn't it? Like really trying to expand
into new territory when you're basically just a glorified DVD rental company. And it just plays
into this idea of Netflix having a big ego thinking that they can do anything. I guess it's good for
like a business to be a bit, a bit malleable and expand into new ventures. But Netflix, what the hell?
Netflix games? What are you doing? What are we trying to do here? As if the homepage wasn't badly
designed enough? Now we have this eyesore. The quality of these games honestly just reminds me
of the kind of spam adverts that you'd see on, on Twitter. What is this? Under watermelon? What?
Netflix? I'm already addicted to a game just like this on my phone. You're too late. This is horrible.
I hate this. I hate doing this. It's easy anyway. Don't, don't mock me. Are you looking at me? Don't
mock me. Also with Netflix games, you can kind of tell that Netflix are being a bit, a bit coy about it
because, you know, they've put beta next to it and they're saying, oh, don't worry,
this is just a work in progress and any issues and it's not our fault, okay? We're trying to figure
things out, guys. It's a beta test. It's an excuse. Get this off my page. It's kind of
uncharacteristic for Netflix to be that coy about something. Usually they have a lot more of an
arrogant manner. Kick off summer of new Netflix popcorn. Cinnamon popcorn, share with the family.
You're gonna love it. Step right off, Popcorn Indiana. Honestly, I have like a picture-perfect
image of Ted Sarandos being, being lured into making popcorn for Netflix. Like, almost like
the villain of Ratatouille when the villain of Ratatouille makes, um, Chef Gusteau microwave
microwave meals or something. Like, come on, Ted, think of the money. Millions and millions
of burritos. And it sells burritos. Millions and millions of burritos. Also on the topic
of food, Netflix also at some point decided to open up, like, a chain of pop-up restaurants
that were Netflix-themed. Orders up. Netflix is cooking up something special for fans of
our favourite food shows. With the opening of our first culinary space, Netflix Bites.
An elevated dining experience from several of our most well-known chefs. Have you ever
watched Chef's Table? Is it Cake or Iron Chef? Quest for an Iron Legend? And wished you
could dive into your TV to sample the delectable dishes on screen? No, quite frankly, I've never
watched any of those shows and never wished that I could dive into the TV screen. Also, I
hate the name Netflix Bites. I'm just, I don't know what to say. I'm just going to sit with
that for a bit. I just hate that name. I just, I don't know what to say. I just don't like
it. Netflix Bite. Bite. I just, why is my voice? Netflix Bites will marry our top food
talent with the proven success of our popular live experiences. That's right, Netflix has
done, like, live experiences, and they list them here. The Queen's Ball, A Bridgerton Experience,
Stranger Things, The Experience, Money Heist, The Experience.
Now, with Netflix shares down about 37% over the past 12 months, the company is hoping that
experiences, consumer products, and video games will help drive engagement and ultimately
will also help drive revenue. Bridgerton Queen's Ball, it's happening in the evenings in downtown
Los Angeles. It's also happening in London.
I bet Cindy Holland is at home thinking, oh my god, I'm so glad I got out of Netflix
at the right time because, like, what is this? Netflix are really going for it when it comes
to, like, live experiences. Like, they're really expanding this side of their brand. Netflix
have announced this intention of a new venture called Netflix House, which, from the sounds
of it, would just be a continuation of these immersive experiences. But instead of pop-ups
around the world, they would be clustered into one space. Not really a Disneyland style,
but more of a glorified shopping mall, basically.
You've started to create toys and live experiences. You've got the Bridgerton Ball and all these
travelling experiences that we've been doing. We're going to pull them together and start
to build out these more permanent experiences. This is a concept of one, something we're calling
Netflix House, that will be full of these kind of consumer experiences. There'll be food
experiences, basically taking what we've learned from all of these, putting them under one roof
in several major cities around the world. Imagine waltzing with your partner to an orchestral
cover of a Taylor Swift song on the replica of a Bridgerton set, and then walking around
the corner to compete in the Glass Bridge Challenge from Squid Game. After pretending to fight for
your life, you've worked up an appetite and want to get a bite. You see a nearby restaurant
with food inspired by Netflix shows from around the world. The meal is memorable, but you still
want to buy some Stranger Things merch. Luckily, there's a shop that sells that Hellfire Club
t-shirt you've always wanted. Not the Hellfire Club. I forgot about the Hellfire Club. Not the
Eddie Munson cosplayers. I don't know, Netflix as a brand is just a weird thing to create as one big
bubble because, well, the intellectual property that Netflix actually own is just kind of all over
the place. There's no, there's no through line. Like, it's all over the place. You can't really
put it under one bubble. I want to dance on the Bridgerton set and then play the Squid Games and then
buy a t-shirt, okay? Before you know it, there's going to be like a Netflix hotel and then Jenny
Nicholson's going to have to do like a four-hour deep dive into it. I would watch the hell out of
that. Number five, pricing. In making this video, I remember doing like a, one of those submit
questions things on my Instagram story. I was asking people directly if they thought there
was a particular reason why Netflix has had a downfall recently. The majority of responses that
I received were about the price and how Netflix has been upping the price over the years and is
getting out of hand. And yeah, that's like the main narrative as to why Netflix has had a downfall.
It's like the easiest kind of numerical thing to point to. I think raising your price as a service
is. That's one of the main things to directly impact the consumer. Even if someone doesn't
use Netflix but still pays for it, you know, maybe they have kids that use Netflix and they
don't actually watch anything on it. At the end of every month, they're still going to get the
notification that Netflix has taken money out of their account and every time it's just going to
be like, oh, Netflix. Oh, Jesus. Just every month, you're reminded that Netflix is slowly draining
your bank account and it just hurts. But as Netflix gradually raise their prices, they think,
well, we're like a staple in the home. We have Stranger Things. We have Squid Game. Everyone's
just going to have to make sacrifices. And Netflix is right. You know, we are the schmucks. As much
as people like me complain about how Netflix is bad or whatever, we're still going to pay for the
convenience of watching Stranger Things on the TV or on our phone, watching Eleven do her thing.
Back when Netflix actually started their streaming system, the standard price was $8 a month.
It's instant, it's unlimited, and it's only $8 a month. Start your free trial today.
And then in 2014, they announced that, you know, okay, guys, we're going to up the price,
but we're going to do it in two years, okay? We're giving you a lot of warning, but we're
going to up the price just a little bit and we're going to do it eventually. Please don't
be angry at us, guys. Please. But Netflix are a lot less apologetic about it now. You know,
ever since 2016, the price of Netflix has in some shape of form almost every year gone up. It used
to be a two-year warning for a little upping of the price, and now it's a yearly thing of, okay,
Netflix are upping the price again. Remember when they first came around, the standard price was
$8, and as of today, the standard price of Netflix is $15.49 a month. That is almost double. I say
almost in that way because I have a little bit of a theory, okay? I think they purposely made the price
$15.49 because, like, you can't mathematically round it up to $16. There's a one cent difference. If you
added a cent, then it would go up to $15.50, which then would be rounded up to $16. And then $16 is
double of $8. So a lot of people would be able to make the headline, Netflix has doubled their
streaming cost since they began, which is a very good headline. That's very eye-catching. It really
puts into perspective a lot of things. And I understand, like, I wouldn't be as angry about
the price increases if it was just, you know, boiled down to inflation or something. I don't
know. But no, every time there's a price increase, Netflix cite the reason as, we're just investing
more in our original content. Which, are you? Are you investing more in your original content,
Netflix? Because honestly, it doesn't feel like it. In fact, the quality has gotten significantly
worse. This is a bowling ball. And this is a cake. And if there is a good quality Netflix original show,
that doesn't necessarily mean that you have to put loads of money behind it and up your price to pay
for it. But no, Netflix have to pay for their real life squid game and their interactive dining
experiences. That's where the money is going. If you ever find yourself wondering where the money is
going, this is where the money is going. And it's also the fact that they make so much content now.
Their money is being spent on just the volume of content. I could spew a bunch of statistics about
how much content they make. But honestly, I think it would be best if I just show you the amount of
shows that they make. The Wikipedia article alone is just insane.
I think that is the kind of midnight, because you have to follow the Schwarzenegger and the
Rockefeller. You can see that but definitely you can see the movies that make this move coming in.
Bit of Twitter you have the next time to watch. Let's try not to watch.
number six cancelling shows this is probably the other most popular suggestion on my instagram
story like a lot of people get very heated about this topic and i think rightly so
seeing that never-ending list of content being made by netflix knowing that a show that you got
really invested in isn't going to have a conclusion because it was cancelled oh it hurts
it's worse than a breakup especially if a show ends on a cliffhanger oh every so often there's a
discourse you know of angry fans tweeting about their favorite show getting cancels i remember
hearing a lot of discourse about like mind hunter warrior nun the oa most recently the one that
people are most angry about is this show called the the dead boy detectives which is a show that
i've never watched i never even heard of it before it was cancelled sadly and that's just because you
know i'm out of the loop i don't really watch tv like i don't really scroll through what's new on
netflix anyway people on my twitter feed were very angry about this show getting cancelled
reminder that this show had lower ratings in its first season than dead boy detectives hey netflix
quick question for you what the is the point of watching any of your shows if you're just going
to cancel after one season sooner or later all of these cancellations are gonna catch up with you
i can't believe you cancelled dead boy detectives a well-written suburbly acted labor of love to make
room in your budget for this garbage shame on you your greed is strangling art i will never forgive you
for pretending this is okay really wish you'd spend a fraction of this promotional budget on
dead boy detectives but you set it up to fail and cancelled it even though it had better numbers
than heartstopper season one shame on you again i think this all boils down to netflix's obsession
with growth putting all of the budget into making as much content as possible to you know replace
all television netflix definitely could have afforded to make another season of this show
like let's be real they could have afforded it they have the money it's somewhere they always
have the money but instead of keeping their integrity and sticking with a program to the
bitter end they prioritize having a volume of content even if it means that the content that
they're making is unfinished netflix are notorious for doing this now you know doing a first season
of a show investing in it and then immediately cancelling it because it didn't do like squid game
or tiger king numbers of growth it's an increasingly harder criteria for shows to just get made all the
way through now and i don't care if they try and justify this by saying like it's really hard to
compete with disney plus or whatever here's a business idea why don't you make shows that are
actually worth the subscription price that i can watch from start to finish you know number seven short
seasons i literally just only want to say that it's really annoying when shows have like eight
episodes a season and then every season is like two years so then you're waiting every two years
for like a minimal eight episodes and it's just like doctor who did that recently with only eight
episodes and it's just annoying and i bet it's netflix's fault somehow because you're making a show
like more bingeable or something i don't know it's just annoying just putting it out there next
number eight sag strike so last year from the 14th of july to the 9th of november there was a mass
strike of members from the screen actors guild and the writers guild you probably remember it it was
it was very widely talked about at the time i believe it's like the longest strike in sag history
we are being victimized by a very greedy entity the entire business model has been changed by streaming
digital ai you cannot change the business model as much as it has changed and not expect the
contract to change too actors refused to work productions were delayed your favorite celebrities
took to the streets oh there's natasha leone again one of the main issues that caused the strike in the
first place was the issue of residuals gained from streaming meaning that netflix was under yet
another round of scrutiny for essentially screwing over the actors that appeared in their shows
by paying them in pennies like actually pennies i remember seeing a particular video of an orange
is the new black actress kimiko glenn who was receiving her residuals and it was just absolutely
nothing and look you can see the paper it lists the episodes that she was in some of them amounting to
a penny each and all together coming to the sum of 27 dollars and 30 cents and just to say like she did
have a moderately large part of the show she's not like an extra it's not enough to be like a million
dollars but like at least a hundred dollars at least a hundred dollars 27 dollars will buy you
like a pair of socks in hollywood we saw this a lot of the time you know a lot of discourse about how
the streaming system is built and how actors are paid considerably less than if they were on say
traditional television you can't on the one hand brag about your hundred millionth subscriber and then
go oh but we really can't give you you know a very modest pay increase it just doesn't work i think
is a very quick and effective way to sway public opinion on a company and its business dealings by
getting everyone's favorite actors out on the street and getting them to spread awareness about
how netflix is bad for most of last year it was kind of cool and hip to be anti-hollywood and well
informed about union issues let's say and rightly so like netflix were they were absolutely evil at
the beginning of the strike it was said the studios and streamers reportedly have no intentions of
negotiating with the writers guild for several more months the end game is to allow things to drag on
until union members start losing their apartments and losing their houses and as this became more
and more like a twitter drama as if netflix was an influencer that was being cancelled a lot of like
stan twitter accounts would reply to things and be like girl what about the strike this really isn't
a good look this should have stayed in the drafts we got to the point last year where people were
treating labor disputes as if it was all just one big you know pop crave headline you know at this
point it's just a universally undisputed fact that netflix is not only bad content but also just
greedy and thanks to last year's strike you know everyone knows exactly how greedy they are
number nine design of the algorithm okay let's role play for a bit let's say that i am a person
who never keeps tabs on the industry i don't pay attention to the news i never go on twitter i don't
have any knowledge about netflix's reputation my only relationship to netflix is the fact that i pay for
them and their button is on the remote even if my knowledge of netflix was that small i think i would
still hate them it's bad products because this system that they have is a mess okay netflix opening
netflix there's a lot of lag there's so many titles that is lagging i've been scrolling for five years
there's so many things top searches games what the hell is this ignore my wallpaper ignore it
why is it autoplaying why are they so big look the tv can't even keep up back to black what the hell
the main hurdle that people have to overcome with netflix is the constant overstimulation the panic
of not knowing what the hell to watch because there's no more sense of quality control at this
point it's just so frustrating to even scroll through netflix especially when you're with another
person oh it just it never ends why don't we uh why don't we watch that no i don't really feel like
watching that no well what do you feel like watching i don't know like a comedy movie or
something like something funny you know okay well go to the comedy film section because right now
you're looking at cookery programs oh yeah yeah comedy section okay yeah my veggie kebab is getting
cold okay i have a veggie i have a veggie kebab right in front of me and it's getting cold it just
feels like you're scrolling for like 20 years and every program every film has equal amounts of real
estate on the page it's just information overload and i know that behind the scenes is going to be
like a real life web developer like a person whose job it is to design all this and i'm sorry if you're
watching this but it's just not good like it feels like it's gotten so much worse the 2024 netflix
experience is offering you like 300 000 different options and only 10 of them being good and uh well
good luck finding them because not even the best web design in the world could fix this amount of
over stuffing of content the common criticism of of netflix that you hear in the industry people
feel like the programming on it has gotten worse i think it's just there's more of it and it's not
all for you so that's that's the truth and it's not just the expansion of original content there's
also a growing amount of cheaply licensed titles that are put on there because i don't know disney took
all the good stuff and netflix has to feel like they have a lot of content even if you're never going
to watch this and then even if you put something on your watch list for later and then have a moment
where you go you know what i'm going to watch that thing now after all this time i'm going to watch
that thing you go back and it's not there it's not it's not on netflix anymore it's a streaming
service supposed to be this stressful because i'm so stressed out right now okay i just want to watch
something over my veggie kebab okay i want to eat my veggie kebab i've seen a common suggestion from
people that netflix should add a a random choice button so that people feel you know less pressured
to find something to watch but fundamentally i think the need for a random choice button on a streaming
service is well let's see okay adding ads to your service having a bundle of services being offered as
an option the service choosing what to watch for you it all kind of sounds like traditional cable
television doesn't it doesn't it like we're just back to square one this is cable we're back we're
back where we started oh my god 10 the cycle i think that streaming becoming inherently the same
thing as cable was always inevitable it is the same money hungry people and the same money hungry
companies behind this all so like did you really expect there to be a change i think that the main
reason that people paid for cable back in the day i sound very american saying cable look if i say cable
then everyone knows what i'm talking about so i'm just going to keep saying cable okay don't make fun
of me the main reason that people paid for cable back in the day was the feeling of choice you know
you have you have the whole world at your fingertips you could choose whatever you want out of all these
channels and then the downfall of cable came the fact that you know out of all these channels that
you were given you'd only just end up watching like two or three all the channels that you were
offered were really just garbage that you wouldn't watch so it became harder to justify the really
expensive price and at the time netflix came in and they were all defiant like no we've put all the
good stuff into one place for a much lower price using the power of the internet it was like having a
new collection of box sets that you could just you know just lightly scroll through and be like oh
i could watch that bit of breaking bad oh i've never watched breaking bad before i'll go and watch
breaking bad and then i'll watch madmen and then i'll watch gilmore girls and now streaming is at
a similar point to where cable was before it's downfall the economics of it all don't make any
sense the creative people are struggling and the companies behind it all have a really inflated
ego so really i'm just waiting at the other end of this cycle just waiting for a new netflix to come
around and be like we've taken out all of the streaming services and we've made it even more cost
effective starting 2035 yeah it's a new dawn for the industry well a boy can dream look i don't
think that's gonna happen but a boy can dream you might not be able to tell by the runtime of this
video but i am thoroughly disappointed by netflix the reason i started this video on a little anecdote
about stranger things is honestly i just wanted to keep alive like the the original vision of what
streaming could have been because it really felt nice for a bit for like a period of two years it felt
really good a lot of people's consensus now is that streaming is actually worse than cable ever
was because cable television never had like an algorithm that knew everything about you not in
the way that netflix does if i do some deep soul searching and introspection and really search within
myself of you know what i want to say right now i think what i want to say is just i want my dvds back
i want to feel how i felt when i played a dvd and i opened on the bbc logo like
there's been a huge resurgence of people you know loving and appreciating physical media and i'm not
talking about the usual nerdy people that collect like blu-ray steel books or something i think the
everyday person is learning to respect physical media again people are realizing how much they love
physical media simply because streaming services like netflix have fucked up so badly they have
ruined their relationship with their consumer there is an intrinsic thing within people to collect
you know to bundle together all the things that we love on a little shelf and you know show
appreciation for it and then our collections that we've made for ourselves start to reflect something
back at us someone's collection of dvds or vinyl records will reflect their media consumption in a
very personal way like when i was a little kid i did have a collection of dvds and if anyone took
the time of day to actually ask me i would have been able to say where i got the film when i got it
if i liked it what i liked about it what happens in it i would have been able to tell you all of it
i like memorized all my dvds you might be able to tell that i spent a lot of time indoors as a child
i just think that people's love for building like a little collection of what they've watched and
what they want to watch is just unavoidable that's why things like letterboxes are so popular why
we love watching celebrities give their top four favorite films and it's why i was up late last
night watching criterion closet videos while i'm making this video i find myself questioning more
and more like the reasons why i watch what i watch and my relationship to what i watch you know away
from the algorithm of the streaming services i think a big reason is i like the feeling that i've
found something whether i was recommended it or i found it by accident a dvd collection feels like a
a collection of discoveries there's something deep inside of me that wants to be a curator of what i
watch and really whatever the hell is going on behind the scenes at the the netflix office is
honestly nothing special because the people in that environment will always be the same they will
always repeat the same mistakes that they've always made and as much as they like to think that
they're the ones in charge of what people watch no i'm in charge i'm the one with the remote
doesn't matter if you replace all television or make loads of popcorn you know it doesn't matter
it doesn't matter it doesn't matter if you wear a blazer that says art is truth on it bella what
were you thinking with that blazer anyway uh justice for dead boy detectives and uh justice for cindy holland
uh justice for cindy holland
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
uh
um
