Well, thanks. It's a pleasure to be here and to be back in New Mexico. So let's get started.
So in 1988, the New York Times reported that global warming had begun. Expert tells Senate
global warming has begun. That expert was this man, the climate modeler James Hansen,
who was the head of the climate modeling group at the Goddard Institute of Space Studies.
Oh, sorry, that got big. Anyway, Jim Hansen testified in Congress that he and his team,
based on modeling results, were 99% certain that the human signal in the climate system had become
detectable. A few months later, the Times reported that the issue of an overheating world had suddenly
moved to the forefront of public opinion. And it had also become a matter of congressional concern.
In 1988, Colorado Senator Tim Wirth co-sponsored a bill called the National Energy Policy Act to
establish a national energy policy that will quickly reduce the generation of carbon dioxide
and trace gases as quickly as feasible to blow the pace and degree of atmospheric warming.
And a few years later, in 1992, President George H.W. Bush signed the UN Framework Convention on Climate
Change, which committed its signatories to, quote, preventing dangerous anthropogenic interference with
the climate system. And when he signed that framework convention, the president pledged,
called on world leaders to translate the written document into concrete action to protect the planet.
So a few years ago, actually quite a few years ago, about 20 years ago, I started wondering,
well, what the heck happened? We had all this good science done by leading scientists at top
institutions like NASA. We had political alignment through the UN Framework Convention and a Republican
president pledging to act on climate. In fact, President Bush pledged to bring the power of the
White House effect to stop the greenhouse effect. So what happened? Why didn't we take these steps that
President Bush had promised us? So part of the answer to that question is in my previous book,
Merchants of Doubt, where Eric Conway and I showed that it wasn't for lack of good scientific information.
Everything Jim Hansen did all those years ago has held up over time. And it wasn't for lack of clear
communication. But what we showed was that the emergence of the scientific consensus on climate
change triggered a politically motivated campaign to cast doubt on the science and to stop political
action. This is the story that Eric and I told in our book, Merchants of Doubt. It's a story about a
cadre of scientists who cast doubt not just on climate science, but on the harms of tobacco use,
on the reality of acid rain and the threat of ozone depletion. And so the people we looked at in this
book were not shills for the fossil fuel industry, although that happened too. They were important leading
physicists. They were all physicists. They had worked on weapons and rocketry programs during the Cold War.
They had headed major scientific institutions, including the U.S. National Academy of Sciences.
So it wasn't remotely plausible that these men didn't understand the science. And so the question we
posed, and this is now going back nearly 20 years, we started working on this in 2005, why would educated,
intelligent people deny hard-won scientific findings, especially about something as well established as
the harms of tobacco or as consequential as the ozone hole? And the answer we found was really politics,
that science denial had nothing to do with the science. And by that I mean to say it wasn't based
on problems in the science, like inadequate data, sample sizes that were too small, models that were too
uncertain, but it had everything to do with political ideology. And particularly we found the ideology of
market fundamentalism. So what is market fundamentalism? Well, different people might have different
definitions, but broadly speaking, it's belief in what Ronald Reagan called the magic of the marketplace,
the idea that markets are powerful and efficient, and that therefore we can trust the free market to be
efficient, but it's coupled to hostility. And this is important because this is where it departs from other
forms of economic thinking. It's coupled to the hostility to government action in the marketplace,
especially regulation. Market fundamentalists will argue that government needs to just get out of the
way and let markets do their magic and any kind of government action like a regulation, the tax incentive,
tax credits, that these are all distortions of the free market. So how did we figure this out? Well,
we spend a lot of time reading their articles, their papers, looking at their letters to each other,
but the most telling example involved tobacco. So one of the emergence of doubt was this man, a man by the
name of S. Fred Singer. Singer was a physicist. In fact, he was, in fact, a rocket scientist. He was the first
director of the U.S. National Weather Satellite Service. But in the 1990s, he made common calls with the
Philip Morris Tobacco Company to challenge the evidence of the harms of secondhand smoke.
By that time, secondhand smoke had been shown in numerous scientific studies to kill hundreds of
thousands of people every year, including infants and children. And this was reported on in a major
report of the Surgeon General and many other studies done in the 80s and 90s. So why would anyone
defend a product that killed people, including infants and children? Well, Singer wrote a major
report in which he answered that question in his own words. He said, if we do not carefully delineate
the government's role in regulating dangers, there's essentially no limit to how much government can
ultimately control our lives. And you can see here, he's collaborating here with a scholar from the Cato
Institute. Well, it doesn't show that Ken Jeffries worked in the Cato Institute, but this report was
published by the Center on Regulation and Economic Growth of the Alexis de Tocqueville Institute.
And the report doesn't say it, but it's entirely funded by the Tobacco Institute, which is entirely
funded by the tobacco industry. So the argument goes like this. If we allow the government to compromise
freedom, like the freedom to smoke, then there's a slippery slope to risking losing all freedom. So even a
seemingly good regulation like controlling tobacco is actually not good. It's actually bad because
it's putting us on a slippery slope to governing control of our lives. And at this point in history,
for someone like Singer, who had really cut his teeth during the Cold War, really a worry about,
specifically about Soviet-style centralized planning and totalitarianism. Now, for these people,
this could be inadvertent. So it could be naive liberal do-gooders who think they're doing good
by controlling tobacco, but are actually threatening freedom, or it could be deliberate. And so Singer and
his colleagues accused environmentalists of being watermelons, green on the outside, but red on the
inside. Yeah. And there's a lot of, in their literature, and in the book we go into this, a lot
of red baiting, a lot of accusing, not just environmentalists, but also environmental scientists
of being communist socialists in their life. And so this helped to explain why a scientific issue like
the harms of tobacco, which is, you know, objectively a scientific question, or the threat of carbon
pollution, would get, quote, politicized. So that was essentially the story we told of Merchants of Doubt.
And when we finished that book, the obvious next question was, well, why did, where did market
fundamentalism come from? And why did so many people accept it to the point that they would
reject well-established scientific evidence of serious harms, like death and disease from tobacco,
or the damages of climate disruption, and reject the need for some kind of government action,
some kind of government redress to address the problem? So this is the story we tell in our new
book. It's the history of conscious programs by American business leaders to promote market
fundamentalism. So it's not a history of economics. It's really a history of ideology and a history of
a business, the business community trying to shape public opinion, but doing it through academia,
public education, popular culture, and ultimately American politics. The argument really was to
convince us that free markets were essential to the American way of life, and that anything else was a
threat to that way of life. So this is a billboard that was run in the 1930s all across America as part of a
large-scale propaganda campaign funded by the National Association of Manufacturers, which was at the
time the largest trade organization in the United States, made up of factory owners, so people who
manufactured cars, carpets, windows, you know, anything, including cigarettes, chemicals, you name it,
they were potentially part of this organization. And the argument here was that private enterprise,
which they later renamed free enterprise, was a foundation of the American way of life along with
freedom of speech and representative democracy. What we show in the new book is that industry
groups and conservative business leaders use the same strategies throughout the 20th century from the
early part of the century in debates over child labor and workman's compensation right up to the present
to try to limit government protections for labor. And the book starts with the debate over child labor,
and it's been so depressing to see the one thing in the book that we thought, oh, for sure, we're not
going to open that debate again, to see the way in which conservative leaders in recent years have tried to
weaken protections against child labor, protections that have been on the books for 100 years now.
to prevent or limit regulation of industries, such as electricity and tobacco, to protect private
sector actors from responsibility for the external cost of their products like air pollution, water
pollution, and climate change. And then tying it into the present to deny the reality of climate change
and prevent the sort of political action that in 1992 looked to be imminent.
They did this through a set of efforts over decades involving advertising and marketing,
attempts to influence radio, film, and television, and outright propaganda campaigns designed to persuade
the American people that any compromise to economic freedom threatens our other freedoms and therefore
the American way of life. And this then we argue culminated in the election of Ronald Reagan,
and I won't have time to talk about it today, but in the book we explore
how Reagan went from being an actor to a politician and how that transition took place when he worked
for the General Electric Company, who were part of the National Association and part of this whole story.
So maybe I'll say more about that, because it's actually a really important part of the story.
But as you know, when Reagan became elected, he famously said,
government is not a solution to our problem, government is a problem. And with that,
Reagan really remade the Republican Party, really shifting it away from the positions it had
taken under Dwight Eisenhower or even Richard Nixon to the sort of very anti-government,
anti-regulatory, anti-tax position that it has held ever since. But we also point out in the book,
it's not just Republicans. These ideas also deeply influenced the Democratic Party to step back
from its earlier commitments to use the power of the federal government to protect workers,
consumers, and the environment. It was not Ronald Reagan, but Bill Clinton, who declared in the 1990s
that the era of big government was over. So telling the story of a big myth requires a big book.
The book is over 500 pages with more than a thousand footnotes. So what I want to do today
is just to offer a small portion of this history that invites us to consider how we, especially
Americans, but Europeans too, have come to rely too much on markets and not enough on government
to address economic and social needs and also redress market failure. So the story begins in the 1930s
with ex-president Herbert Hoover. As we all know, Hoover lost the presidency to FDR in 1932,
and many of us were taught in school that he was a discredited president because of his
conspicuous failure to alleviate the Great Depression and his constant repetition of the idea that
prosperity was just around the corner, we could trust business, business would get on track, and the
federal government shouldn't get involved. But the fact is Herbert Hoover remained highly influential
in business and Republican Party circles and particularly through a book he wrote two years
after he lost the presidency, a book called Challenge to Liberty.
And in this book he lays out what becomes really a fundamental tenet for the arguments that follow.
He writes, it holds both in principle and in experience that intellectual and spiritual freedoms cannot
thrive except where there are also economic freedoms. It insists equally upon protections to all these
freedoms or there is no liberty. This argument then gets taken up in the late 1930s by the National
Association of Manufacturers and particularly by one of its leaders, J. Howard Pugh. And yes,
this is the same Pugh as the Pugh charitable trust. And if you drill down on their website,
you can find a very small nine point font place where it says our views are not necessarily the same
as that of our benefactor J. Howard Pugh. J. Howard Pugh was an interesting man. In the 1920s,
NAM was very active in fighting against child labor laws, trying to affirm the right of businessmen
to run their factories as they saw fit without government interference. And in the 1930s,
they launched a massive multi-million dollar propaganda campaign aimed at challenging and
fighting the New Deal. This campaign was targeted at teachers, ministers, community leaders, ordinary
Americans to promote what they now referred to as the indivisibility thesis. This idea that Hoover had
laid out that economic and political freedom are indivisible. So if you compromise economic freedom,
let's say by restricting child labor, you would threaten political freedom as well. They did this and
there's the NAM archives are very, very large. There's hundreds and hundreds of folders about this,
documenting all the stuff. But it included things like press releases, push-pulls, integration propaganda.
They funded Hollywood films, both feature films and documentaries, newsletters, magazines, cartoons,
posters designed to be put in factories, and also various attempts to influence what was taught in
schools and universities. And just as a little footnote today, they're very active in fighting climate
policy and carbon pollution. They were a major player in the lawsuits against the Obama administration,
clean power plants. So in 1939, while this campaign is going, NAM organizes the arguments under the
rubric of what they call the tripod of freedom. And this really encapsulates the essential argument
that they want to make. So this is December 1939. This is reported on in the New York Times. It's quoted
verbatim in the New York Times. So this is from their annual meeting. And they issue this declaration in which
they say, in a world torn by war and dictatorship, Americans live at peace and in freedom. The best
assurance that we shall remain free and at peace is our faith in constitutional representative democracy,
in free enterprise. And note, by the way, the language here is shift. There's a lot of manipulation
of net language in these stories. So people used to talk about private enterprise. And the NAM leaders
concluded, actually, American people didn't really like private things. So we'll call it free enterprise,
because people like free things. So free enterprise, civil and religious liberty as inseparable
fundamentals of freedom to be cherished in Brazil. And of course, the point here really is the defense
of free enterprise. But this is a way of saying that we're not just trying to protect our own business
interests that we have the larger interests of the American people. So the basic claim is that then
that America is founded on these three principles, like a tripod. And like a tripod, if any one leg is
compromised, the whole structure becomes unstable. And therefore, they argue it's essential to protect
free enterprise in order to maintain political freedom and democracy. And then this then becomes used
as an argument against things like the fair labor standard. So this idea was promoted very aggressively
in a variety of formats and venues. But the one that NAM thought was most effective was a syndicated
radio program extolling the virtues of capitalism and vilifying FDR and the New Deal. It was called the
American Family Robinson. So it's a nod to the Swiss Family Robinson, the idea of surviving through hard work
and Christian Protestant work ethics virtues. And according to NAM's own documents, the program's
purpose was, quote, to present openly and effectively and attractively as radio will permit, the fundamental
principle that freedom of speech in the press, freedom of religion and freedom of enterprise are
inseparable and must continue to be if the system of democratic government under which this country has
flourished is to be preserved. So each episode featured some member of the family facing a
challenge, which then they solve on their own without help from the government. And usually
there's some didactic portion against socialism that's added in. And there is a brother-in-law who's
socialist and lazy. And so there's some things about how his cockamamie schemes are always going wrong.
The NAM documents, they refer to this as a propaganda campaign. So it's not just me saying it is. And in fact,
we know that this was syndicated in 365 stations across the country. NAM distributed for free
to all these radio stations, but it was broadcast without any indication that it was paid for, sponsored and
written by NAM. And we found one document where one NBC affiliate says, no, we can't run this. This is
obviously propaganda against FDR. But the vast majority of other stations, as far as we can tell, did in fact run me.
And I gave one talk where someone in the audience told me that his grandmother had told him that she remembered
listening to this program. So millions of Americans heard this radio program. Fast forward another 10
years, the idea is still being developed by J. Howard Pugh. So this is a letter from 1948 to the libertarian
writer Rose Wilder Lane. Anyone here know who Rose Wilder Lane was? So this is a name that is not familiar to
history, but should be. How many people here wrote, read, ever read The Little House on the Prairie books?
All the women. Some of the men. How many of you ever saw The Little House on the Prairie television
series? All the women. Some of the men, right? Okay. The Little House on the Prairie series was
marketed as the true life stories of Laura Ingalls Wilder growing up on the American frontier.
The stories were actually written by her libertarian daughter, Rose Wilder Lane, who recrafted the stories
as parables of libertarian self-sufficiency and anti-government. And in the book we have a whole chapter
about this story. So Rose Wilder Lane is a close friend of J. Howard Pugh. She's also friends with Howard Hoover.
She's moving in a circle of people developing libertarian arguments at this time, including Ayn Rand,
also, I've forgotten her name, Isabel, the third fury of libertarianism. Well, doesn't matter. Anyway, so she's part of the
circle. So this is a letter that J. Howard Pugh writes to Lane and he says, I believe that freedom
is indivisible. So sometimes they call it indivisible, sometimes inseparable. When a part is taken away,
that which remains is no longer freedom. To illustrate, suppose we should lose our industrial freedom,
then it would require a compulsory form of government which enforce the decrees having to do with the
conduct of industry. And a compulsory state can brook no freedoms. So you see the argument being
developed. It's a kind of slippery slope argument. If the government wants to mandate minimum wage or
maximum hours or the weekend, it's got to become coercive because it's got to enforce this in some
kind of compulsory way. And once you go there, then before you know it, it's going to take over everything.
Now, you and his colleagues face three problems. I'm obviously skipping over a lot of detail here,
and I'm happy to answer questions about any of this. But there were at least three problems with
their argument. The first was that it wasn't true. Free enterprise appears nowhere in the declaration of
independence of the Constitution. The phrase doesn't really even exist in the 19th century. And in fact,
if you know anything about US history, you know that the government had been deeply involved in the
American economy throughout its history. We had big protective tariffs in the 19th century. In fact,
one of the ironies of this story is that NAMM had actually been created in the late 19th century to
argue for protective tariffs for manufacturing. But in the 20th century, they flipped the argument to be
against tariffs and against the government. So it's just not true. It was also obviously hypocritical
because NAMM, Pugh, and Herbert Hoover were arguing for businessmen's freedom to set wages and working
hours in their factories. But they fought bitterly and sometimes violently against their workers' freedom
to unionize or to engage in collective bargaining. And it was self-serving. In the 1940s, memories of the
Depression were still vivid and bitter. So one of their challenges, they have to convince the American
people to trust the very people whose practices, particularly including speculative financial
practices, had arguably led to the Great Depression. As historian Wendy Wall has noted, in the wake of
the economic collapse, the quote, narrative of capitalist driven growth seemed questionable at best,
monstrous delusion at worst. So how do you convince the American people of something that is false,
hypocritical, and self-serving? Anyone want to guess? The answer is you recruit academics.
So NAMM and his colleagues realized that many people would think that these arguments were
self-serving. And they did polls in which they concluded that their arguments were not actually
getting through and they needed to take a different approach. And so what they did was to try to recruit
academics to foster and bolster the academic bona fides of these arguments. And the two key people they
identified were these men who some of you will know about, two of the founders of neoliberalism,
you see them there, to come to the United States. And this is also particularly ironic as well because
in the American family Robinson, they're constantly arguing that socialism and communism are foreign
theories that are anathema to America. And then they turn around and they actually import foreign theorists
to America. So they recruit Friedrich von Hayek and his mentor Ludwig von Mises. They're both Austrian
economists. They're both associated with the family and the Austrian school.
And these business leaders, they did not advertise these jobs, but they worked behind closed doors to
finance positions for them at New York University for four nieces and the University of Chicago for
Friedrich von Hayek. And there's a fun anecdote about this one too, which I particularly liked sharing if
I'm ever at the University of Chicago. So at one point, these business leaders go to speak to Jacob Viner.
Do people here know who? He was an important economist in the early years of the Chicago School.
And they discussed this with Viner about setting this up. And they have in mind that they...
And so Viner says to them, well, you know, I don't think that any credible university is really going to
agree your terms. You're saying who you want to be hired. You're saying what you want them to work on.
You're saying what you want the findings to be. So the business leaders go to Princeton and Princeton says,
no, we don't agree to those terms. And then they go to Chicago and Chicago agrees to the terms.
So Hayek is hired at Chicago. And then though, there's more. What they do then is to produce
simplified versions of these key arguments that are then heavily promoted in popular context.
And then they fund additional academics to refine the argument and carry it forward.
So a lot of this work is based on von Hayek's important book, The Road to Serfdom, published in 1944.
Now, if you've read it, you know that this book is a pretty sophisticated articulation,
but it's an articulation essentially of the Indivisivory thesis.
Hayek was focused primarily on Soviet communism and the risks of centralized planning.
And he's writing this in the context of what is going to happen in Europe at the end of the war,
and the concern that there's pressure in the light of the Great Depression. People are worried about
what's going to happen to the economy when the war ends. Will England in particular slip back into
depression? And there are people who are arguing that Western European governments need to be more
interventionist, maybe even consider centralized planning. So he's addressing a real concern at the
time. It's not a straw man argument. But he goes on to suggest that even in a non-communist country,
even a country that does not have a centrally planned economy like the United Kingdom, if economic
freedom were compromised, for example, he gives the example of the National Health Service, he claims
that it would put that society on the road to serve them. So it's the slippery slope argument.
Now, I think it's important for us to understand that, as I said, Hayek is a sophisticated thinker.
So if you read the whole book, you see that actually Hayek allows for quite a few exceptions.
He writes, the successful use of competition as the principle of social organization precludes certain
types of coercive interference with economic life, but it admits of and even requires others.
So this raises the question, okay, so what kinds of coercion is acceptable? And he says, well,
here's are some examples of legitimate interference. And interestingly, a lot of them have to do with
pollution, preventing the harmful effects of deforestation, some methods of farming or the noise
and smoke of factories, prohibiting the use of poisonous substances, or requiring special precautions
in their use. And then also things to do with labor, limiting working hours, enforcing sanitary conditions
and workplaces, controlling weights and measures, and preventing violent strikes. He actually has
quite a few examples of places where he believes government action in the marketplace is wholly
justified. In fact, he even argues for some form of social insurance or social welfare. He writes,
there can be no question that adequate security against severe privation
and the reduction of the avoidable causes of misdirected effort and consequent disappointment
will have to be one of the main goals of policy. That's why I tell this. And he explicitly rejects
the arguments for laissez-faire. He says, it is important not to confuse the opposition against
planning with a dogmatic laissez-faire attitude. The liberal argument is in favor of making the best
possible use of the forces of competition as a means of coordinating human efforts, not an argument for
leaving things just as they are. But in the hands of his American acolytes, it became an argument for
laissez-faire, for leaving things just as they were. And in fact, it took on the quality of religious faith.
So the same business leaders who brought von Hayek to America, they loved Hayek's book, but they thought it
was too intellectual for American audiences. So they arranged for a Reader's Digest condensation, a 20-page
condensation that was published in April of 1945. The original book has no illustrations, and the
Reader's Digest condensation has one, and I wasn't able to determine who actually drew this up. But here
it is, a kind of 10 commandments of market fundamentalism. Political and economic rights,
protecting the dignity of the individual. And there's a whole story to be told about individualism here,
which we can talk about later. But you'll see things like the right to contract, the right to bargain
for goods and services in the free market, the right to go into business and make a profit,
workplace of our choice. And this is my favorite, the last and most important, the right to freedom
from arbitrary government regulation and control, but all based in a fundamental belief in God.
And so there's also an important part of this story that relates to Protestant theology. I'm not
going to talk about that today, but we have a whole chapter in the book about that. And if people
are interested, I can talk about that, but small fun tidbit. So one of the things J. Howard Pugh does,
again in the 50s, is to fund a group called Spiritual Mobilization that is designed to align
American Republicans with free market capitalism and to address certain theological objections to the
brutality of capitalism. And one of the people who he tries to recruit for this campaign is Norman
Vincent Peale. You've all heard of him. Guess who officiated at Donald Trump's first wedding?
Norman Vincent Peale. So there are some weird and interesting captions in the story.
Okay, so this is published in Reader's Digest, 20 pages, and then they decide that that's still too
highbrow. Yeah, sorry. When they say right to bargain with our employers, second from the top
on the right. Oh yeah. Are they referring to unions or? No, that's, that's something more individual.
Yeah, it's no, it's explicitly anti-union. So what they're saying is the right, it's connected to this
word individual. What they mean by that is that each individual employee should have the right. And so
it's an argument against unions because unions, they argue, deny individuals that right to free bargaining.
So, okay. And then they do something even more fun. They publish a comic book. So they turn the
road to serfdom into the road to serfdom in cartoons. And I'm not making, this is their, so they, this is
their illustration. This was published in Look Magazine. Some of you remember Look Magazine. It was
the largest mass circulation magazine in America in the 50s, 60s. And with only a tiny, and it was reproduced
as a pamphlet that then was distributed by General Motors in their factories to all of their employees.
So millions of people received this. So they take the whole argument and they turn it into 18 cartoons.
But now they shift the argument away from von Hayek's argument about Soviet-style central planning
and shift it to the economic mobilization of, in the United States during World War II. And the argument is
that wartime mobilization is the functional equivalent in America of centralized planning
in the Soviet Union. And so it begins with war mobilization and it ends with the firing squad
shooting. Wow. Now we know that Ronald Reagan read Hayek in the 1950s. He talks about in his biography.
We're guessing he read the Reader's Digest or the cartoon version.
One of the things that's tricky about doing historical work of this kind is that it's, in a way,
it's a very supply-side analysis. When you go to archives, you find things like these documents
described in these campaigns. It's very hard to figure out who actually read these materials.
Were they influenced by it? And so we did a lot of work to try to get at that. And we found some things,
but one of the best things we found was documentation that NAM put together about what the outreach of these
things were. And so we know that the original Road to Serfdom sold 17,000 copies. That was far better than
the editors expected. And even today, 17,000 copies for a serious book is good. But look, circulation in 1948
had a circulation of nearly 3 million. And Reader's Digest had a circulation of nearly 9 million. And we
know another million more copies were distributed by General Motors. Now, for comparison, U.S. population at
that time is about 140 million. So they're reaching close to 10% of the U.S. population. So that would
be like as if my book reached 33 million people. That would be nice. But, you know, that won't happen.
Yeah. Hi, Melanie. This is actually fascinating. But what you're talking about here is something
I'm wondering about, which is the topic, correlation versus causation. Many people have done many campaigns
over a very long time. Especially here, there are other things like this existential fight with the
Soviet Union. So if anything that distinguishes us well, they are centralized. So anything red is bad,
but we must be antics. So is there any way that you can think to try to tease out correlation versus
causation? Yeah. Well, of course, and this is a big problem with all social science research. And
I maybe should have said more about Ronald Reagan, so maybe I'll work that in. But part of what we try to do in
the book is, first of all, show that these things, we know these things reach large numbers of people.
So that doesn't prove what they thought about it or how they reacted to it. But we at least know that
they were exposed to it. And the same with the American Family Robinson. We know that 300,
more than 350 stations syndicated that. So we know that millions of Americans heard that. So that doesn't
prove what they thought or how they reacted to it. But it at least shows that this message is being very,
very broadly distributed. But I'll try to say a little bit more about how I think
this actually influences people. And it's such a book, I'm always struggling with what to talk
about. And maybe I should talk more about the religion part. But let me continue and we'll see
if we can get there. So one of the points I want to make here, though, and again, this relates to the
question of this as propaganda versus this as raising important and legitimate questions about the role of
government, is that in these popularized versions, all of Hayek's nuance and all of his caveats are
expunged. So all of his discussion of the legitimate forms of interference and coercion are all removed.
And then they do the same thing to Adam Smith. And this is actually my most fun, I think the most
fun story. So Hayek was brought to the University of Chicago as part of something called the Free Market
Project. And other historians and economic historians have written about this. The idea was
conceptualized by a former DuPont executive, a man named Jasper Crane, who was active in NAMM,
and a man named Howard Lunau, who was head of the Libertarian Volcker Foundation, no relation to Paul
Volcker, but the first libertarian foundation created in the United States. Crane was heavily influenced
by Rose Wilder Lane. And this is a publication of the letters between Rose Wilder Lane and Jasper
Crane. So again, this is about how these arguments are being developed. And the idea they came up with
was to fund an academic program at a prestigious university to develop, if it's for me, tell them
I'm busy. To fund an academic program at a prestigious university to develop a blueprint for, quote,
an effective competitive system of free enterprise. So as I've already suggested, the idea here is not
to fund open ended research. For example, you know, you might think in 1950, you'd be really interested
in a research program on the causes of the Great Depression, but it's not that. In fact, the arguments
are stipulated in advance. And again, this comes from the documentary record. The point was to promote
the primacy of the free market as the most efficient organizer of society, and to explain that the
free market is systematic, rational, not chaotic or disorderly, and consistently efficient in allocating
resources to their best use. And to emphasize the relationship between capitalism and freedom,
with an emphasis on regulation as, quote, a menace to the free market and therefore to freedom
generally. So these are the arguments that NAM has been developing since the 1930s. And now we see them
being explicitly articulated as a program for academic research at the University of Chicago. So as I've
already suggested, you see that these champions of competition are not actually supporting a free
market of ideas or even open inquiry. There's no advertisements for these jobs, there's no competitive
process for funding, there's no call for proposals, but rather they're handpicking participants, they're
getting them hired behind closed doors, and they're funding research that supports their political ideology.
So who are these other participants? Well, there's quite a few and I don't have time to talk of them,
but two key ones who are very important and influential are George Stigler and Milton Friedman,
both of whom would later win Nobel Memorial Prizes in economics. So in 1957, as part of this project,
Stigler publishes an edited version of Adam Smith's classic work, The Wealth of Nations. And just as the
edited version of The Road to Serfdom left out Hayek's caveats, so did the Chicago School version of The Wealth of Nations.
Now, The Wealth of Nations is a giant book. How many people here have read it? No one? Oh, one,
two, bless you, three, okay. So you know it's over a thousand pages long, it's filled with incredibly
prolix, 18th century prose, so it's a quite difficult book to read. So obviously if you're writing an edited
version, especially if it's intended for teaching, then of course a lot of things would have to be left
written. But Stigler leaves out all the passages where Smith recognizes the limits of self-interest,
where he discusses the need for taxation, regulation, and restraints on self-interest to
protect public safety. So these include extensive discussions of banking regulation,
of taxation to support public goods like roads and bridges, the need for minimum wages, and he has a
whole discussion of how factory owners pay literally starvation wages, and he even says how you might
think that in a rational system no factory owner would pay starvation wages because rationally you
wouldn't want your workers to starve, but in fact they do and workers do starve. And he even has a whole
conversation about how workers deliberately have more children than they think will reach childhood
because they know that a good number of the children will die in some cases of starvation. And he discusses the
rights of workers to unionize, he doesn't use the word unionize, but to organize, because he says factory
owners will always have more power and they will use that power to manipulate the law in their favor,
and so workers have to combine in some way to level the playing field.
Yeah, I think I can skip the banking regulation, I've sort of already made that point. Now Smith knew
that some observers would object to any regulation as a denial of freedom, so this argument is already
coming up in the 18th century. So in response he offers a succinct summary of when regulation is
warranted, he says, when the natural liberty of a few individuals endangers the security of the whole
society. And he focuses particularly on bankers in this context, he says reckless bankers do this,
they threaten they could bring down the whole economy through their reckless practices, and so he
concludes, the obligation of building firewalls in order to prevent the communication of fire is a
violation of natural liberty, but exactly of the same kind with the regulations of the banking trade
which are here proposed. In other words, regulations are needed when the actions of some individuals
threaten the freedom, safety, or security of the rest of us. Jacob Viner, who I just mentioned,
who was one of the founders of the original Chicago School of Economics wrote in the 1920s,
the modern advocate of laissez-faire who objects to government participation in business on the grounds that
it is an encroachment upon a field reserved by nature for private enterprise, cannot find support
for this argument in the wealth of nations. So why don't more of us know this? Why do we think of
Adam Smith as being this advocate of untrammeled self-interest? Well, in the book we argue that it's
obviously a complicated story, but at least in part it's because this is the version of Adam Smith that the
later Chicago School created and sustained and popularized. And that partly has to do with the
work of a second key figure in the story, Milton Friedman. So in 1962, Friedman publishes Capitalism
and Freedom. Essentially, it's a restatement of the Indivisibility thesis, but written for an American
audience. And in the forward, he acknowledges his debt to fund Hayek. It was based on a series of lectures
that were funded by the Volcker Fund, so the same people who had set up the free market project.
And we argue that it was in fact the blueprint for an effective competitive system of free enterprise
that Trane and London had imagined and paid for. Friedman's central argument is essentially derived
from the Indivisibility thesis. He says, the great threat to freedom is the concentration of power.
And he argues that by distributing power, the marketplace protects freedom, and therefore capitalism
protects freedom. And any compromise to capitalism then threatens freedom. In other words, it really
is the Indivisibility thesis. Now, freedom, though, took the tripod of freedom claim and reduced it even
further to an even simpler claim that capitalism and freedom are indivisible, that they're two sides of
the same coin. And this is partly why his work then gets picked up later in Eastern European countries as
they're trying to throw off the yoke of the Soviet Union. Now, these two books have been hugely
influential. The Road to Serfdom has sold over two million copies and been translated into 20 languages.
Capitalism and Freedom sold about a million copies. It's interesting, it's actually sold fewer copies
than this, even though it's more famous, translated into 18 languages. And the key point of this, which if you
don't watch Fox News, which most academics don't, you may not know, but the Road to Serfdom has been
promoted by many of America's most prominent and impactful conservative voices. And again, we still
don't know exactly what people are thinking, but we know that these ideas have been promoted to
not just millions, but tens of millions, maybe even a hundred million Americans through venues like
Fox News. So this is Glenn Beck on Fox News, and here you can see the Road to Serfdom. And according to Amazon,
the day after Glenn Beck discussed this on television, they sold 40,000 copies of this book,
40,000 copies. So some of the people who have promoted it, Glenn Beck, Rush Limbaugh,
Limbaugh, Tucker Carlson, Ted Cruz, Michelle Bachman. This is really good. Michelle Bachman once said she
read it on the beach. So, okay. Paul Ryan, many more. And in 1991, Hayek received the Presidential Medal of
Freedom. President George H.W. Bush, who I started this talk with, called The Road to Serfdom,
a book that still thrills readers everywhere. And von Hayek was awarded the No Mill Memorial,
ties in economics in 1974. Capitalism Freedom has been even more influential. It's still in print today.
Okay, that's, I have to update. It's not 500,000, it's a million copies. It's on nearly every top 10 list of
conservative books and many top 100 books of all time. Time, Times Literary Supplements, many others.
He became a regular columnist for Newsweek, where he wrote hundreds of editorials over several decades.
He became an advisor to Margaret Thatcher, to Ronald Reagan, also to Augusto Pinochet in Chile. And in 1976,
he won the Nobel Prize, Memorial Prize. Now, why did he become so influential? Well, again, hard to know for
sure. But one of the things that enabled Friedman's message to be distributed very broadly was a
television series in the 1980s that was broadcast on public television called Free to Choose. I had
to do some work to figure out who funded this. You know, normally when you watch public television,
at the end they always say, made possible by a grant from the MacArthur Foundation and, you know,
people like you. There's nothing like that at the end of any of the episodes of this. So I actually reached
out to the public station where this was developed and a very nice guy there went into the archives,
into the file cabinets, and found this little-known fact, but you won't be surprised by this point in
the talk. It was funded by a libertarian businessman, a man named Bob Chaitester, who funded not just a
TV series but a full-fledged marketing campaign, including a companion book to explain the benefits of
capitalism and political freedom to the world and a foundation that still exists today called the Free to
Choose Network. So again, we don't know what people watching this show thought, but just imagine
for a moment if someone, if you had a 10-part television series on the dangers of AI with a
companion book. I mean, that would shift the public conversation, right? Or at least would have some of
that. Okay, and Friedman was awarded both the National Medal of Freedom and the National Medal of Science by
Ronald Reagan. Today his ideas are promulgated in a large network of free market think tanks and
foundations. This is just some of them, some of them you've heard of, some of them you probably haven't.
Heritage Foundation though, of course, are the authors of the Project 2025 book. And all of these
think tanks promote free market solutions to social and environmental problems, and nearly all of them
have denied or despised the scientific evidence of climate change. Many of them have been involved in
outright attacks on climate scientists. And recently many of these same groups were involved in anti-vaccine
and anti-mask mandates on the grounds of personal or what they now call medical freedom. Medical freedom
is the latest sort of frontier in this landscape. So in short, what we argue in the book is that the members
of NAM didn't just manufacture cars and carpets, they manufacture a myth. And they would spend the ensuing
decades burnishing its intellectual credentials and embedding it in politics and popular culture.
And I should maybe here say a little bit more about Ronald Reagan. So in the book we have two
chapters that talk about a key part of the way then this became mainstreamed into the Republican Party
was through Ronald Reagan. So we all know that Reagan was an actor before he became a politician,
but he was also a New Deal Democrat. And if you ask the question, well, when did he change from being a
Democrat, a Democratic actor to a Republican politician? The answer is during the years that
he worked for General Electric. General Electric was a member of NAM and its vice president of public
relations was a man named Lemuel Boulware, who was famous for union busting tactics. It even,
there was a term Boulwareism that developed and GE was taken, was sued by its unions and was found guilty of
violating the Wagner Act and other statutes through its anti-union policies. So found by the National
Labor Relations Board to have violated the law and its treatment of unions and collective bargaining.
And Lemuel Boulware was Ronald Reagan's boss. And it's in this period. And we know that one of the
things Boulware did was he gave reading lists to all the people that he, who worked for him. And that
reading list included The Road to Serfdom and a whole bunch of other texts that come out of this period.
So we know that Reagan was inculcated with these ideas while he was at GE. We have a whole discussion
in the book about General Electric Theater. And when Reagan then finishes working for GE, very
conveniently at the same time that General Electric, who are promoting free market capitalism to their
workers and to their communities, is actually being prosecuted by US Department of Justice for
conspiracy to rig electricity markets, right around this time Reagan leaves. So whether he knew what was
going on or not, I don't know. But he leaves, and this is when he decides to run for office.
And his run for office is bankrolled by a group of GE executives and a group of other business leaders
that they're associated with. And they set up a kind of kitchen cabinet for him. So he's been an actor,
and then he's hosted a television series, and he's been on the lecture circuit. But he doesn't really know
anything about education, transportation, the environment. So they set up a kind of kitchen
cabinet of advisors who then give Reagan these crash courses on a whole set of issues. They fund his run
for governor of California, and they launch his political career. So there's a very direct connection
between everything I've been talking about today and the way Ronald Reagan then becomes a prominent
politician and begins to transform the Republican Party. So I don't have time to talk about that in detail,
but I wanted to add that as part of your question. So how do we know it was a myth? Well, I think,
and how do we know that this was propaganda as opposed to legitimate political or academic opinion?
Well, for one thing is that NAM and others at the time described it as propaganda. So NAM talks about
running a propaganda campaign. They're investigated by U.S. Congress for this activity. Congress concludes that
no laws have been broken, but this is partly because certain laws that get passed in the 40s,
like having to do with the media, weren't actually on the books at that time. But the other point is
that as a historian, as historians, we can point out that the key argument was untrue. The indivisibility
thesis is easily refuted by history. Capitalism and freedom are not inseparable. Well, how do we know this?
Well, in the early history of capitalism, unregulated markets had produced a world of hurt and suffering.
It was a world that was cruel and dangerous and included slavery. So slaves obviously were not free.
It included the Native American industrial assimilation schools for which President Biden has just
recently apologized. It included widespread child labor, children as young as two years old working in
mills in Massachusetts. It included what William Blank famously called the dark satanic mills,
brutal working conditions, starvation wages, no limits to the hours that workers could be forced
to work, and dense pollution that impacted both workers and the communities around them,
and violent suppression of unions when workers tried to organize against these practices.
The accident crisis, so in the United States in the early 20th century, there was something that was
referred to at the time as the accident crisis. Sorry, that millions is incorrect. It should be
hundreds of thousands. But many workers were killed or seriously injured on the job every year. It would
be the equivalent of 1.5 million today. So one in every thousand workers were killed on the job.
So in the 19th century in anthracite mining, six percent of all workers were killed on the job every single year.
And in 1914, it would have been safer for a young man to go fight in World War One
and to go work on the railroads or in a mine. American capitalism had obviously not bought freedom
to the 10 million black Americans enslaved in the US South, nor had it protected the legal or political
rights of female citizens or Native Americans. But a good deal of this suffering and denial of freedom
was remedied by law and regulation, and it did not lead America into totalitarianism.
It did not lead to the economy. In fact, most historians would say that it strengthened democracy
and strengthened civil society as it protected the freedoms of workers, children and black Americans.
Unregulated markets were also bad for democracy. Monopolies and trust had led to vast accumulations
of wealth by robber barons who corrupted both markets and political systems. And this is a really
important point that comes up again today in light of the question of the monopolistic practices
of many, you know, media and computer companies. The Sherman Antitrust Act was specifically designed
to protect democracy against corporate concentrations of wealth and power. So it wasn't just about protecting
markets from anti-competitive practices, but it was also about protecting democracy. And this is made clear
in the speeches that John Sherman made when he introduced the bill to Congress. And when it turned out to be
insufficiently robust, it was strengthened in 1914 by the Clayton Act. The fact is the free market hadn't
even protected competition. When markets were unregulated, competition was often replaced by monopoly.
And of course, Teddy Roosevelt became famous for trying to enforce the antitrust act.
By the 1930s, many steps had been taken to try to address the failures and the social costs of
capitalism. Various laws had been passed in response to fraudulent and anti-competitive practices,
to correct market failures, and to protect innocent and vulnerable people. And I threw this in a few months
ago because I thought this would be useful to know. The first mandatory law for vaccination of children
was passed in 1809 in Massachusetts. Sherman Antitrust, 1890. Federal income tax, 1913.
Clayton Act, 1914. Eight hour day, 1918. And none of these reforms, and there are many, many more that
I could talk about. We have more time. These reforms did not leave the United States into totalitarianism.
On the contrary, most historians would say they made America more equitable and more democratic.
And of course, then the Great Depression leads to a second round of reforms, particularly to address the
financial speculation that had played a significant role in the crash of 1929. And so again, a few more
bills. And just yesterday, I read some people in the administration to be are now talking about whether we
should repeal the FDIC. Yeah. So 1933, FDIC. 1935, Social Security. 1938, the Fair Labor Standards Act,
that finally, after four decades of industry opposition, finally, more or less, outlawed child labor and
wage laws. And this was largely the work of Labor Secretary Francis Briggins. So my point here is simply that all of
these facts were known to von Hayek when he wrote The Road to Serfdom in 1944. None of this was a secret.
And all of this was known to Friedman when he wrote Capitalism and Freedom in 1962. But they brushed these
facts aside in favor of a political argument. And we think that as time went on, the case against the
Capitalism and Freedom argument actually became even stronger. In later years, 1973, Chile, advised by Milton
Friedman and Friedman, undertook a set of economic liberalizations on the grounds that that would
increase freedom. And this is why Friedman supported it. But in fact, the brutal dictatorship reduced
freedom and murdered thousands or tens of thousands of Chilean citizens. In 1978, China developed its
open door policy embracing market economics. Many people at the time welcomed this, particularly many
economists, thinking it would lead more or less inexorably to political liberalization. But in fact,
it didn't. And today in China, there's a sort of system that economists don't really even know. They
don't agree on what to call it. But some people refer to it as market authoritarianism because the
liberalization of the economy has not led to liberalization of politics. Now, of course, in 1962, Milton Friedman
Friedman didn't know what would happen in Chile or China, but he did know what had already happened in
the United States. That American capitalism had not protected freedom. That workers, consumers,
and environmentalists had had to fight the American business community, not all of it,
but significant parts of it, to protect their rights and their freedoms. The truth, I would argue,
is that freedom is not protected by our forms of distributing goods and services,
but by our forms of governance, by our laws, and by our civic norms. The Yale historian Timothy
Snyder has written that a common American error is to believe that freedom is the absence of state
authority. Well, I think we now know why so many Americans make this error, because for more than a
century, it's what we've been repeatedly and consistently told by powerful people and organizations.
And there are deeper historical roots that we can definitely talk about, including Henry David
Barrow. But there has been a kind of bombardment in the 20th century of this idea that government is
a threat to freedom, markets protect freedom, when the reality is at minimum a whole lot more complicated.
In 1864, at a time when America was even more polarized than it is today, Abraham Lincoln wrote,
we all declare for liberty, but in using the same word, we do not all mean the same thing.
The shepherd drives the wolf from the sheep's throat, for which the sheep thanks the shepherd,
while the wolf denounces him for the same act as the destroyer of liberty. Or as Isaiah Berlin put it
some years later, liberty for wolves can be death to lands. I gave this talk once at the Greater Yellowstone
Coalition, and I thought, oh, maybe this isn't the right place to be defending wolves or to be attacking wolves.
Okay, so to conclude, now market fundamentalism obviously is not restricted to the United States,
but it does find its fullest expression and most wide English support here. And this is neither
coincidence nor historical contingency, but we argue rather the results of a nearly century-long
successful propaganda campaign to persuade the American people of the efficacy and benevolence of
markets and the inefficacy and malevolence of, quote,
big government linked to this corollary insistence on the primacy of markets as protectors of freedom.
But we would argue that the free market is a theoretical idealization and that the question
we face is not whether there is or isn't a role for governance in the marketplace.
The question is how we define that role, how we balance competing interests and competing freedoms,
and how best to address market failures and remedy them when they occur, whether it's climate change,
health care, or whatever. And this is what links this new work to our previous work,
because the ideology of the magic of the marketplace stands in the way of addressing many of our
business biggest challenges, including, of course, the climate crisis.
Now, of course, many economists have recognized this. Back in 2005, Nicholas Stern, the former chief
economist of the World Bank, called anthropogenic global warming, quote,
the greatest and widest ranging market failure ever seen. More recently, Klaus Schwab, the founder of the
World Economic Forum, wrote free market fundamentalism has eroded workers' rights and economic security,
triggered a deregulatory race to the bottom in ruinous tax competition, and enabled the emergence of
massive new global monopolies. Oddly, though, Klaus left out what I would argue is the biggest market
failure of our time, which is the climate crisis. Because as Kim Stanley Robinson has put it,
the problem with the invisible hand is that it never picks up the check. Thank you very much.
