You guys know and love him.
One of the most prolific comedians working right now.
Put your hands together for Josh Johnson!
It's funny how sometimes people like enter your life
without you ever meeting them.
But you don't get to know them,
but you hear stories about this person
through the people that you know,
or a friend of a friend,
but then they just keep coming up
and you feel like they're in your life,
even though you've never met them.
You wouldn't know them on the street if you saw them, right?
There was a guy like that for me named Marty.
I never met Marty.
Wouldn't have been able to track him down
if you gave me a 23andMe
and a genealogy test or something like that.
I knew Marty through stories
because Marty had an interesting life.
This dude spent a bunch of time in France.
He was American-born, lived in France for a long time,
learned French super fluently,
and apparently, he told one of his friends,
this is how I heard the story,
that he dreamed in French.
Like, he spoke English, obviously,
and he lived in the States again,
but his dreams would just be full of people
speaking French at different points and stuff.
And it came up because here in the U.S.,
he met someone and they fell in love,
but she was French,
so went all the way to France,
didn't meet anybody.
Came back here, met a French woman, right?
And it was a day
where Marty, he basically, in a nutshell,
forgot his girlfriend's birthday.
You know, it was their first year together,
so we're still, like, been dating some months,
but hanging out all the time and everything.
I said, my birthday.
You're supposed to remember,
that's part of the relationship quiz.
And it kept seeming like maybe there was a surprise waiting
or he was pretending to have forgotten or something,
and then he went and took a nap.
Yeah, not only did you forget my birthday,
you napping in my face.
And then I guess when she realized
that he genuinely did forget,
she woke him up and she woke him up mad.
And when she was mad,
she'd go straight to French, right?
Because she'd be so mad,
she wasn't putting it in English for him.
And so he woke up to his girlfriend
yelling at him in French.
So he thought he was still dreaming.
So wakes him up,
can't believe you forget my birthday.
What's wrong with you?
Are you out of your mind?
You over here playing in my face all day?
All in French, I'm paraphrasing.
And then he was squinting real tired
and was looking up at her and just wonders,
I guess, to himself, am I having a dream right now?
And so he, casually,
while she's yelling at him,
puts his finger in her mouth.
I don't know if,
I don't know if you ever had somebody
forget your birthday before,
but you definitely have not had them
put their finger in your mouth
as you were letting them have it.
And there were,
there was like a,
felt like dozen funny stories like that about Marty.
Marty was an interesting dude
and he just moved in different circles than me.
Never met Marty or anything.
But Marty got older,
got married,
had some kids and stuff.
And then Marty got sick.
And Marty,
Marty had cancer.
And you know,
there were some treatments that they could try,
but it wasn't looking good.
And his insurance wasn't gonna cover it
and he couldn't do it out of park pocket.
And Marty passed away.
And it's crazy because one of the other things
about Marty that people talked about
was how he was like a good boss.
It's sometimes hard to be a good boss
because people don't like being bossed around.
You know,
like people don't enjoy someone telling them what to do,
but somebody got to tell you what to do
if we all work here.
Do you know what I mean?
I would just show up to work and be like,
you figure out whatever you feel like is.
Nothing would get done.
Like there do need to be bosses sometimes
in certain situations.
It's just how you are a boss, you know?
Like there are certain managers
that I've had in my life
that honestly I had the easy job
and they still made it hell
because they were hell to be around, you know?
There's nothing like having an easy job
that you know is an easy job.
I could do this in my sleep,
but I got to do it next to a jerk.
That's, that's the worst, you know?
You know, those people got time to lean,
got time to clean.
And this is another thing I have to accept about bosses.
I have to accept about managers.
There are some jobs where genuinely it's in the handbook.
It's like part of the job.
The job makes you kind of come off like,
or maybe turn into a bastard.
Do you know what I mean?
Because there are policy handbooks of companies
where if you got time to lean,
you got time to clean is in the book.
They just quoting.
So there are some jobs
where you got to be a monster to do them.
And there's some jobs that make you a monster, you know?
I was thinking about that
when the shooting in New York happened.
I know.
Because for me, in case you didn't know,
in case you somehow have not been on Earth,
there was a shooting in New York.
Basically, this dude walked up behind CEO of United Healthcare
and he shot him several times
and then he went off, right?
But apparently he had been camped out there waiting.
That dude walks past him.
He goes, pop, pop, pop, pop, pop, pop.
And then he jumps on apparently a city bike,
which is not advisable.
Which is not advisable.
And then he heads over to Central Park
and disappear into the night slash day,
because it was day.
It was broad daylight, too.
That's also what felt so insane about it.
It happened during the day.
You got to understand, there's New York day things
and New York night things.
We usually keep the shootings after dark.
And when it happened, it shook everything up.
Everyone was obsessed.
The news was obsessed.
The news was obsessed when it happened.
The news was like, finally,
we have something to talk about that's not Trump.
Oh, wow.
What a day.
So the news talked about it all day.
The news talked about it nonstop.
The news would even have people on to discuss it,
who clearly were just finding stuff out in the moment
with us on the news.
They would bring the expert on and then play the clip.
And then the expert would watch the clip and be like,
damn, it's like you.
You were supposed to know, sir.
That's why you're on the news.
The news was absolutely obsessed, right?
The news even did a thing that I've never seen before
that I very much resented,
because I'm just gonna be honest with you.
This entire time, I'm just gonna be telling you how I feel.
I'm not gonna tell you how to feel.
I'm not gonna judge how anyone feels.
I'm just talking about myself, right?
When I saw it happen,
when I saw that video footage that they played,
when I saw that dude walk up and pull out a gun
and pointed at that CEO,
I thought to myself,
thank God those are white hands.
Oh.
Oh.
When I saw those lily-white hands.
When I saw those pearly-white hands,
I thought to myself, what a white sight.
What a...
What a beautiful, white thing to happen
that does not have anything to do with me,
that should not blow back on me at all.
What a white moment in America.
And then in their obsession,
continually, over and over again,
describing what happened, going over what happened,
the news did something.
CBS this morning showed the clip.
They showed this man walk up, pull out the gun,
and they said on CBS in the morning,
a light-skinned man...
No.
No, no, no.
No, no.
Light-skinned.
No.
No, no, no, no.
No.
The white people never-
Alright,nya.
Wait.
Wait.
When, when, when has-
When has-
When, when has-
I was horrified.
No, you know, you know if it had been a black person,
they would say black, because they love saying black.
Anytime a black person does something, the news is like,
this black, this black was last seen at the scene of the crime.
You know this black, this black.
If you've seen this particular black,
call this number
so you can report him for his blackity-black crime.
Guys, light skin.
The news was obsessed with it.
Top to bottom, you couldn't, you could not watch anything else.
I'm sure stuff was happening everywhere in the world,
but you wouldn't know it.
Just kept circling this one block in Manhattan.
And people were obsessed with it.
We, us, were obsessed with it.
It's all I heard people talking about.
People who I know don't watch the news.
People who I know don't really care about current events.
Everybody was talking about it.
Everybody was debating it on social, online.
Everyone was talking about it.
People were so obsessed that the backpack
that the shooter was wearing sold out.
Because in America, everything is an ad, including murder.
People were so obsessed.
You know like those Timothee Chalamet lookalike contests
they've been having in New York?
A bunch of white people got together.
Because they knew he was white.
A bunch of white people
got together in the park
and all dressed like the shooter
and had a shooter lookalike contest.
And it's been different.
People were so obsessed.
People were so obsessed.
You know like those Timothee Chalamet lookalike contests
they've been having in New York?
Got together in the park and all dressed like the shooter
and had a shooter lookalike contest.
And it's been done in comedy before.
I understand.
It's a joke that's well-worn.
White people be like this.
Black people be like this.
But can I just say,
as a black person,
we have never,
as black people,
watched the news,
seen the suspect,
and then went outside specifically dressed as the suspect.
We've never watched the morning,
the eight o'clock,
the 10 o'clock,
the midnight news,
and been like,
oh, that's a good fit right there.
Let me make sure I got it right.
A red bandana.
Okay, I need a red one.
That's just how you can tell being white is a different experience.
It's because these white people racially profiled themselves for fun.
That was...
That's just having a time.
So the news was obsessed and people were obsessed and CEOs were obsessed.
CEOs were like,
what?
What?
What happened?
Oh, my God.
Oh, my God.
Oh, my God.
Are you serious?
And they didn't know each other?
Kids?
He just did that in broad daylight to one of us?
And CEOs started making moves, man.
CEOs of all the health care companies started taking down all of their profiles,
all of their LinkedIn's were just...
back to factory settings.
And look, I need to be clear about something.
I mean, you're going to get...
you're going to glean this off of me the entire time.
I don't want anybody to die, right?
I don't celebrate death in any way, right?
But I will say, if you feel in the wake of this thing happening,
like you have to scrub all mention of you,
all knowledge of your existence off of the Internet,
then maybe, just maybe, take a look at how you do business,
take a look at the person...
Do you know what I mean?
Because...
Because I've seen this thing before in a different way.
Okay, so I had a buddy who...
I went to his apartment, went to his apartment for the first time.
And this dude...
I understand taking precautions.
Because that's what they will say they were doing.
They were like, we don't know the motive.
We don't know why this person would do this thing.
We don't know who they are.
We don't know if they're going to come for one of us.
So we try to protect ourselves, you know, take everything on.
And that's what this guy was doing.
I went to his house for the first time.
Went to his place and he had six locks on his door.
At six locks, something needs to change.
At six locks, you either need to move or change your ways, all right?
Because this dude had six locks.
He was dealing a little bit of drugs and stuff.
But I was like, six is...
Come on.
What are you doing?
It takes you a minute and a half to open the door.
I can hear it. I can hear...
You hear chains, you hear all that stuff.
You know, I was like, isn't this worse for you?
You really worried somebody coming to get you?
You got six locks.
You sure you won't get killed trying to get in?
But that...
That happened and the news
was having trouble thinking of a motive.
The news...
They were like, why?
Why would anyone...
Why...
Who could it be?
No.
Police were having trouble coming up with a motive when they went on the news.
They were like, we have no idea why this individual would do something like this.
CEOs could not think of a motive.
They were like, but we're...
Us.
I thought everybody loved us.
Everybody wants to be us.
Why would somebody come after us, right?
You see it on the news.
And that this is also, I'm not gonna lie.
This is how you can tell the news is owned by billionaires.
Because the news was like this, uh...
This devastating, terrifying, harrowing attack in New York.
And I'm not saying I'm...
Look, a murder did take place.
I'm not saying that it couldn't have been those listed as those things.
I'm just saying you're the news.
Like you are the like mainstream media.
You play horrific stuff all the time.
You're the same news that when those pages were going off on those people in the Middle East
exploding, you were like, check this out.
Isn't that wild?
The moment a thousand pages went off and killed a bunch of people.
You know what I mean?
That same news is like, we still don't know.
Who or why or what?
Or how?
Police couldn't think of a motive.
CEOs couldn't think of a motive.
CEOs of other healthcare companies couldn't seem to think of a motive.
This thing happened the same week as one of the main insurance providers was saying out loud with
their full chest, we're going to stop doing anesthesia.
If you take too long, you better...
Which by the way, is not up to the patient.
That's also one of the most insane things about that new policy they were going to try out.
I've never had to administer anesthesia to myself.
That's just heroin.
Yeah, if your surgery takes too long, it's not like they're there, by the way.
It's not like they have to wait on you in the waiting room or something.
If your surgery takes too long, we're going to charge extra to put you back under.
If your surgery takes too long, we might not cover more anesthesia.
In what world did we think you could pay for health insurance and then you wake up during,
who knows, whatever serious surgery you're having, and then your doctor has to be like,
hey, do you have like $6.50? Because...
Because if not, if not, look, if not, I know you're a little groggy, but can you understand me right now?
I know you're literally open, but can you understand what I'm saying?
If you don't have it, that's okay. I got a stick. We can Civil War this right now.
The stick is $20 though, so it's...
Couldn't think of a motive, you know? And the CEOs as well, when you look at this guy,
you look at this dude...
I don't think anyone was ready. I don't think the news was ready. I don't think the police were ready.
I don't think the rich were ready for how like on the shooter's side the public was.
Do you know what I mean? Like how absolutely unequivocally on his side...
Immediate.
I didn't know it had happened and there were already jokes.
Do you know what I mean? Immediately.
You know, the people... I'm not going to say as a whole, because I'm not going to speak for everybody,
but for the most part, were on the shooter's side. They don't know the motive. They don't
know why I did this thing, but they were glad that it happened.
And so out of it, you get these CEOs, you get these rich people going on the news and really campaigning,
being like, look, the CEO, this man was a father, this man was a husband, this man...
And they really appealed to the humanity of the CEO. And there were people who heard that,
who heard that appeal. And they said, yeah, no, I know. I know he was a person. So was my cousin.
So was...
So was my brother. So was my sister. So was my friend.
You know what I mean? This man had children. He leaves children behind. This is a senseless death.
It did not have to happen. And it's like, yeah, no, I know about unav...
I know about avoidable deaths. You know, I'm a customer.
I know people who have died these avoidable deaths because it took too long to get their
medicine, took too long to get the treatment. Maybe it wasn't covered. Maybe it's...
They're on the phone forever. This man was a father. He was a husband. Okay. So was Marty.
And I think the thing that people are wrestling with, the thing that we're all trying to contend with
in how we feel about this thing, because people want to feel like good people. We know that murder
is wrong. We know that death is a tragedy, right? Because to me, personally, when I look at any death,
when I look at any killing in that way, I personally look at it as a loss and a tragedy,
because as long as someone is alive, there's potential. There's potential to turn things
around. There's potential to change. And then if you lose that potential, then your story gets cut
short and maybe things would have turned around. I'm not saying that they would have, but the thing
that we're all wrestling with is that a murder did happen. Someone killed someone in cold blood.
They just didn't kill an innocent man. Do you know what I mean? That's also what feels so
conflicting about it. Like a killer killed a killer. This dude was the CEO. A lot of people died under
his watch, through his policy, through what UnitedHealth does. You know? There are a lot of
people that are gone. And when you can see an act happen in real time, it's very easy to look at it,
be shocked by it, and call it murder. When you can spread all of the culpability, when you can spread
all of the actions across thousands of individuals and a whole system, now somehow it's nobody's fault.
You know? And like, you look at someone like Brian Thompson, that CEO.
That dude was, to himself probably, I'm assuming, just good at his job. It's his job to make the
company money. I don't know what CEO, outside of maybe like a gun manufacturer, wakes up and wants
people to die. Like, I don't know. I don't know what CEO wakes up. These CEOs, they work 80-hour
weeks and they don't see their families and everything, but they do it because of their
obsession to succeed and to build up the company, to make the company successful,
to give back to the shareholders. All the reasons they come up with. And if some people die along the
way, then that sort of is what it is, right? But this dude, make no mistake, he was a killer. He was such a
good killer that the company was like, damn, Brian. Damn, you cold-blooded. We need to make you CEO.
Wow. You don't care. You don't care at all. Women, kids, you get them all. Wow, Brian.
He got promoted the way a gang member becomes a leader. You know, you're the coldest one out here.
You know, it's tough. It's really tough. It's hard. It's also hard because when you talk about it or
whenever you're feeling what you're feeling, you don't want to, we're all human, but you don't want
to lose your humanity. You know, you don't, you don't want to get so spiteful that you lose some
of yourself, you know? And so this dude, they're, they're looking for him. And it's, it's hard
because the people are on his side. There's literally people dressing up as him, right?
And I'm not going to lie. I, I feel like some of the cops were even on his side
because the cops were on a manhunt for him in Central Park and they weren't looking hard.
Dude, they weren't like, did, did you, if you saw the news and you saw them in Central Park,
they, I've never seen a more lackadaisical hunt in my life.
This, there were cops in Central Park. This is being, they see the camera and they know
what's going on the news and they were still like, he ain't in this bush.
Where else is there to look?
Oh, oh, it's hard. You know, it's, it's also difficult because you want to, you want to have,
empathy for, for everybody if possible. You want to see every angle if possible, but this,
this one is, is tough in a way because of what Brian was just a representative, by the way.
That dude, that dude just is one of the dude, nothing changed. He's one of the dudes and he's,
he can be one of the dudes because the system's already there. So it's not as if doing anything
to him does anything to the whole, right? I mean, I will say, I do think they roll back
that anesthesia thing. That did happen.
Maybe they'll go through with it later, but for the time being,
it seemed like they were like, Ooh, okay.
You know, but, but
he's, he's allowed to be where he is, how he is because the system at play,
a system by the way, who didn't care about Brian either. Let's be honest about that.
You know, because that man was headed to a meeting when he was murdered and
investors still had the meeting.
That's how it works. They, they were getting notifications on their phone
that Brian was outside and they were like, Oh, so the minutes, um, how's next quarter looking?
I mean, that's why it's not, it's not worth it. You know, when you put, when you put like
that much profit over the person, you, you, you are also lost in that thing. Right.
And I think that's a harrowing thing. I think, I think for, for CEOs, that was like a terrifying
moment because it was the first time that they saw that we see them the way they see us.
Do you know what I mean? Like that, like that's, that's gotta be scary because for them,
make no mistake for them, we're, we're not clients. We're not consumers. We're not customers.
We're not even users. None of the names that they put in their reports. None of the things
that they say to their shareholders were numbers or account number where this thing,
which is why when we go away, when we disappear, when we die, it doesn't really mean anything to them
because they never really saw us. And then the, the, the response to this shooter, this like
overwhelming positive response on social, I'm not saying it was everybody, but a lot of people,
it was a, it was kind of this wake up call that we don't see them as people either,
which is, that's scary. That, that's a, that's a scary place to be in, you know,
because when you would see it on the news and the news described it, let's, let's not mince words.
It was a murder. The man was murder. You know what I mean? And the news would describe it as if it was
the singular event in history, this horrific, this horrific crime that took place in the streets of
New York in broad daylight, this harrowing attack. And I'm not saying that it wasn't. I'm just saying that
the woman in the video with her coffee, that got out of the way, didn't spill.
It was one of the most New York things I've ever seen.
And so then they, um, they, they catch the, the shooter, right? And when they caught the shooter,
I was at a coffee shop and everyone got a notification on their phone. We, we weren't all talking to each other.
Just different. You could see everybody was either already on their phone or pulling their phone,
but I heard beeps. I heard all the little notification noises. And then they, they, they catch the shooter,
right? And when they caught the shooter, I was at a coffee shop and everyone got a notification on their phone.
We, we weren't all talking to each other. Just different. You could see everybody was either already on their phone or pulling their phone,
but I heard beeps. I heard all the little notification noises. And then in this coffee shop, not even kidding,
there was a collective, aww.
Aw, that's the noise you make if the baby hippo mudang dies.
That was wild. Aw, yeah. They caught them in a McDonald's and there, there was footage of them
on the news later in that McDonald's eating a hash brown. And when I saw that, I was like, why,
wait, he's eating a hash brown at McDonald's. He's eating McDonald's hash brown.
So it had to be before 10 30.
He's eating a McDonald's hash brown, which means somebody woke up early to snitch.
Damn. Barely awake at nine o'clock. I don't know. Blinking. Oh, that must be him. Let me make the call.
You know? And what's even crazier about that is apparently, at least of, as of the time I am talking
to you, it looks like that that McDonald's worker that called him is not going to get the reward money.
Which, wow.
Is not going to get the reward money. And people were looking it up. The person was like, why,
why wouldn't I get the reward money? Everything. Apparently that what they were told and what the
internet says is like, actually the process of collecting reward money for turning someone in
is very complicated. Um, because there, there's a, an amount that has to be, it has to be approved by two
different bodies and one body approved the $10,000. But when it got up to like 50, 60, it wasn't
approved by both bodies. So then when they turned him in, they may not get anything at all, actually,
because there's so much confusion around how much to give them or if it's the full amount. I'm like,
damn, that's kind of wild to me because there was no confusion when they called and they were like,
nigga here. Um, so y'all coming or that was very straightforward. There weren't any other things
you needed to check before you came and picked them up. You know, that's why they, they, they,
in my opinion, they did it wrong. You know, if you're going to call and you're going to tell people
that he's here, don't call the police right away. Get your money up.
Call Blue Cross Blue Shield.
Call Blue Cross Blue Shield and be like, hey, uh, I know you don't know me, uh, but
I think I might have eyes on your boy and, uh, we don't know what he gonna do next. So
what are you thinking? 50, 60?
I'm just wondering how, how, how much he's worth to you. You know what I mean? Because I could,
I could make some other calls if you want. I can,
nah, I can call a couple of different people. There are about six providers. Y'all got a real
monopoly going on. So kind of, cause he might be here. He might not.
Uh, uh, hurry up. It looked like he leaving.
I always thought it was very straightforward. You know, there's a reward out for a fugitive
and then you turn in the fugitive and you get the reward. That's how it happens in all the Westerns.
You know what I mean? But then they're like, oh no, actually I, I'm, I'm, the FBI and the, uh,
the local police have to decide on an amount and then, um, there's, there's like an arbitration
process and everything. It's just so funny that like this whole thing happened and then them
trying to get their money just sounds like an insurance claim.
Um, so then they, they come and they catch the dude and he has everything with him. He's got
his backpack with them, gun in his backpack, four fake IDs and everything. And it's kind of wild
because so many people, when, when the attack first happened, thought this dude must be an assassin.
How do you, how do you get out of New York? New, this man was in Manhattan and he did a shooting
and now no one knows where to find him in New York, a police state with surveillance everywhere.
The man was on an island and he got off and they couldn't find him. He must be a genius.
And then you find him at 1002 in McDonald's in Altoona, Pennsylvania
with hash brown crumbs all over his face.
And then people went from calling him a genius like, oh, he's so dumb. He's the dumbest man
that's ever lived. Look, look, I think all this proves is one thing. When you read history and you
look back, uh, some of these people, cause, cause there have been individuals out there saying you
say he's a killer. I say he's a freedom fighter. There are some people that think he's a revolutionary
and everything. Let's just say this. This is proof that even when you read a history book,
revolutionaries were just sort of figuring it out as they went. You know what I mean? I'm sure
Shea Guevara had his days where he was like, y'all, I don't know. Uh, whatever y'all want to do, I guess.
Um, they, they see the fake IDs, they question them, they bring them in and everything. And
his name is Luigi
Mangione or Mangione or Mangione. There's so many different ways I've heard his name pronounced
that I'm not positive the name he going by wasn't just one of those fake IDs. Like that's,
that's the most cartoonish name I've heard in years. Luigi Mangione. That's,
sounds like you making fun of an Italian person.
Luigi already wild. He don't even go by Lou. Luigi.
And they put his picture all over the, the news and everything. And it turns out that he
is very good looking, like just
upsettingly good looking, almost objectively in a way, like
crazy. Everything, everything in its right place and everything's good,
strong eyebrows with a big smile and everything. And just all the pictures, because you know, you know,
when the news catch you, when the police catch you, they try to put up some, depending on who you are,
this usually happens to black people, but it happens to white people once in a while too,
where they try to find the craziest picture they can of you. And I think they tried, but it's,
it was tough work because he is a good looking individual. Every picture looked good.
He would just be with model rockets looking like a model. Like it was, it was crazy. They take his mug
shot and the mug shot looked like a cologne ad. Like that's.
That was upsetting to me as a fellow man. I was like, y'all gotta get one bad pic, please.
One bad picture. He was doing everything in that mug shot, but biting his lip. Like,
you've seen the mug shot. My man was.
Mug shots supposed to be simple. Mug shots supposed to be your face and your profile,
your height. It's supposed to be very quick and easy. You know, this man was so good looking. They
took extra mug shots. There's some, they're like a little lower than him where he looking down.
Like, there's some up high where he just like, you can, you can tell even,
even the mug shot photographer was like, now do it like you're a bad boy.
They tried so hard to get a bad picture of him that they took stills from video.
They tried to take stills from video. Cause that, that usually gets people. You take a still from a
video and somebody was blinking weird. You, okay. Normally people blink with both eyes at the same time.
Every once in a while, like, let's say you mid yawn or something,
or you're chewing one eye on my clothes before the other eye.
And if you catch me in this moment, I look a little, little off something going on with me.
And now if you tell people I killed a bunch of people, you're like, I can see it. I can see it on.
That's what the other eye is hiding is secrets. That's why it's closed like that. Okay.
I'm trying to, this man was being led to the jailhouse through what looked like a tunnel and he getting
pushed by police through a tunnel and he's screaming and they took stills from that. And those still
don't look good. Who looks good screaming?
This man is getting pushed through the tunnel, yelling back at the media going,
like just, I'll show you right now.
What about that was sexy?
And people already thirst trap me. We thought Ted Bundy got letters.
It was, it was insane. It was very aggravating. And then
every picture looked good to the point where editors, editors and media consultants and stuff
like that were like, stop putting pictures out of him. That's how good he looked. They were like,
stop. You botched it. Don't put out another picture. And you could tell that the newspapers
were getting aggravated because these newspapers and these, these media companies are owned by
billionaires, billionaires who are terrified right now of what's happening. And they see the public
lauding this dude as a hero. And they're trying to get at least something. The cops literally had to
tase this dude. So he pissed himself. So he took one bad photo. But even in that one, you're like,
oh, I just know that there was somebody, there was somebody at a newspaper flipping out going,
y'all can't do your job. Y'all can't take one bad follower of this man.
Everything gotta be in focus. You can't even make it blurry.
But I'm not gonna lie. When they caught that dude, I felt, I, everything
started to come back up top, like surface level again, where I felt bad for, for a lot of different
people. You know, I felt, I did feel bad for, uh, for Brian Thompson's kids. Cause you don't pick who
your daddy is. You know? And to a certain degree, I even felt bad for the shooter. Cause I'm like,
you're 26 and you're, you have money. Something happened. Something, something happened. You're smart.
You have your whole life ahead of you with all of this opportunity.
You disappeared for some time. And now you do something happened, you know, but I felt especially
bad, like really, really bad for, for women because finally there was a good looking, rich,
well-read man who has nothing to do with Hollywood, but he does murder some.
So, I mean, I could just see, I could just see somebody trying to defend him. Just
women defend their bed too hard sometimes. Just like, he just did one.
It was just one murder. Okay.
He can't even, he can't even murder a little, like you judging me. Cause my man, your man cheat.
All right. How about that?
Um, it felt bad for, for a lot of people when it happened, when it became like surface level real
again, it wasn't just this like spy crime mystery thing. It was like back down to earth with real
people. I also feel very bad for
anybody else who got shot that day. It's New York. A lot of people get shot in New York every day.
Imagine, imagine you get shot in New York. How they got me, right? Are you holding it? And let's say
you're an artist. So you actually do your own police sketch of your shooter and then you hobble
your way over to the police station and you put it in front and be like, look, that's exactly what
he looked like. I had a lot of time to draw it. Uh, can you go looking? And then the police look at you
and be like, sorry, this other thing's sort of an all hands on deck.
You know, but yeah, yeah, it's tough. It's tough because, you know, there was even a lot of talk about
which CEOs and this whole thing were, were safe. Do you know what I mean? Because like healthcare
CEOs were on high alert, but I can, I'm not gonna lie. You know, Luigi, he went, he went to Starbucks
and then he did that murder and then he hopped on a city bike and he left New York and everything.
If you're the CEO of Starbucks, you gotta be like, oh, thank goodness.
You know, Starbucks does stuff too. Starbucks,
Starbucks, they, they love that labor. They love that. They love that cheap labor. So for you to go
to Starbucks before you take out a CEO, not gonna lie, you might as well shot that man with an iPhone.
Like, what are you doing?
And then he gets found at a McDonald's. I'm sure the CEO of McDonald's is like, oh, thank God. Okay.
I was always good. Yes.
You know, the CEOs were freaking out, you know, across the board. Who would have thought,
who would have thought CEOs were family? Do you know what I mean? Like, and, and let's be clear
about something. Don't mistake the different CEOs that commented on this, the ones that stayed scared,
the ones that, that, that appeal to, to a different way of doing things while they keep doing everything
the same way. Don't mistake their self-preservation for empathy.
Right? Because those CEOs, they know, you know, and it's not even as if people hated people because
they were rich. They hated a system that destroyed people's lives, you know, because Luigi is rich.
Luigi is so rich. When I found out how rich he was, that's so rich. The dude's family owns
two country clubs. Look, why do you think I came?
This dude's family owns two country clubs. This is just me outside looking in. I didn't even know
you could own a country club. I thought it was owned by the country.
I had no idea because usually people don't put their name on the country club they own. It's not
like it's Rick's country club place.
That's crazy that Luigi's family had more money than the CEO, but then the CEO comes from like humble
beginnings and has more money than Luigi does personally. And so it became this whole thing
where people, some people started turning on Luigi and then rooting for the CEO. It was, it was odd
because people got too wrapped up in the money. But for me, it's not the money specifically. It wasn't
about who's rich and who has more money than who. It was about a system that destroys people's lives.
You know, it was about the fact that some jobs make you a monster and there are some jobs you have
to be a monster to do. You know what I mean? And so for me, I don't, I don't even care that Luigi is
rich because people, the people, right? The people that love that it happened, the people that didn't
care that it happened, the people that just wanted some taste of revenge for how healthcare and health
insurance has destroyed their life. We use healthcare and health insurance interchangeably,
but I think you know what I mean, how these insurance companies take the good work of doctors,
the good work of nurses, and they, they make it so it's inaccessible, you know? And I think that
the CEOs were scared, but let's be honest, not all CEOs were scared. I'm pretty sure the CEO of Ben and
Jerry slept pretty good this entire time. You know, like, nobody was calling for all the CEOs. Nobody
wanted to get Ben or Jerry. We were both very happy with those individuals, you know? You also have
a year where whistleblowers who, who try to stand up to power and assist them, not just like one person,
right? Because that's why I think a lot of CEOs don't understand and why a lot of news media didn't
understand about how the people feel is that there were people who tried to do things the right way.
They, they whistle blew. Hey, this company is doing this thing. It's either putting your life in danger
or it's stealing from you. And then all of a sudden 2024 seemed to be the year of whistleblowers turning
up dead. You know what I mean? Look at, look at the Boeing, look at the Boeing whistleblower.
That dude turns up dead when he's supposed to testify in the thing he already risked
his life to do. And you're telling me he just mysteriously died in the parking lot of his hotel
room that nobody knew he was staying at. Come on now, come on. And then my man is blowing the whistle
on a bunch of stuff we already know. He's like, the door going to fly off. We heard.
And then another whistleblower dies and another whistleblower dies. And then just today,
just today, the whistleblower that blew the whistle on open AI was found dead in his apartment.
And so, yeah, I think that people as in individuals just generally in the world are scared. They're
scared of what happens when you stand up to power. They're scared of what happens when you try to do
what seems like the right thing, you know, and these powerful people step in and we don't know,
but it looks pretty obvious what happens. And I think, I think, I think for me,
at least to me, people, all of us are like mirrors of each other. And right now,
the mirror is like shattered a little bit. If you put up two mirrors next to each other,
you make an infinite image, right? In both directions. But if you crack just one of the mirrors,
you've cracked the whole infinite image, you know? And so the way that they see us,
not as people, not as, not as people who they should take care of because we are their customers.
We are their consumers. We gave them money in good faith for insurance, for our health. And then you
deny when I need something, I've been paying all this money. If I had just saved the money and put it
aside, I might have enough myself. And now you're standing in the way of me and my health. And you
don't think that there's going to be any blowback with that? You don't think anything is going to
happen next? That's wild. We're in a time where you see like Josh Shapiro come up and be like,
this guy was not a hero. Let me be clear. Sure. Fair enough. I'm with you. All right. But you have to
pass legislation. You have to get it through and don't let a lobbyist sway you and don't let a lobbyist
sway your colleagues. You have to do something then. Because I, I, I cannot stress enough how
scary it is, how much of an inevitability we're heading to. You know what I mean? If you, if you,
if, if you look at history, history alone all by itself is a playbook for some people,
is a cautionary tale for other people. I, I think a lot of the answer to what we're facing is, is
in history. It's in, it's in Versailles. And when you read, when you read the history of Versailles,
you read the, the history of, of French Revolution. It's very apparent that, you know,
whether it's police, whether it's an army, guards, whatever it is, they protect the powerful, not the
people. You know, and the only reason that the people won in the French Revolution, in my opinion,
is because the army's guns took like a Seinfeld episode to reload. Like say, yeah,
probably get them up out of there real quick.
Like you, you go to, I went, I went to Versailles. I went there and it is beautiful. It's, it's,
it's a testament. It's a monument to like what people can accomplish, but it's, it's all one man's wealth.
You know, it's all for the king, but the gardens are beautiful. Inside is beautiful. The mirrors,
the everything it's decadent. It's, it's when I walked in, I was like, wow, I get how this can
happen. I get how you could have everything in the world and you want to make something like this.
And it's still not enough. You want to add to it. You want to build more, build better. You see the
king's, you see the king's bedroom. You see where Marie Antoinette, her, her, it's like, you see so
much. And then you, and then you walk through the thing and you also are like, oh yeah, I can also see
how if you were hungry enough and you broke in here and you saw what they did, you would probably grab
everybody. It doesn't make it right. But France was headed towards an inevitability. You know what I
mean? And if you, if you get on TV and you say, this is wrong, this is absolutely wrong. Okay. I agree
with you, but what are you going to do now? What's the plan? Like politicians cannot afford to do
nothing. CEOs cannot afford to do nothing. And the people cannot afford to do nothing. And if the last
part scares you, you might be on the wrong side of history, you know, but that's, that's a tough thing
too. Cause now there's a lot of people saying like, all right, you got them, but good luck finding a jury.
Good luck finding a jury that wasn't, wasn't hurt by Brian Thompson.
Yeah. Yeah. That's a tough one. Cause now to me, all the Ouija has to do is show up in court
and be like, y'all, I tried to call and tell him I was crazy, but they kept me on hold for so long.
They kept me on hold for so long. I figured maybe I'll just go talk to him personally.
All night.
Donnelly.
Donnelly.
