Hi, welcome to Justin's Morning Coffee. All right, so what I want to do today is I want to take a
step back and I want to give a 30,000 foot view of what I'm calling the ultimate story map. Now
I'm going to link below the lectures that I've been doing on Christopher Booker's seven basic
plots. I've been plotting them out on the two mountain system, which is kind of conceptualized
by Carl Jung, the mountain of success, the mountain of legacy. But that's only actually one component
of my comprehensive theory of story or my story map. So I want to give a step, take a step back
and take a look at what the other components are. What I've been talking about with all of this is
just the first one, which is plot. I want to make the point for you today, I want to basically try
to convince you that narrative or story really has four parts, plot, character, atmosphere, and
viewpoint. And real quick, that's basically what happens on the timeline, the order of events,
who is in the story, where the story takes place, and who is a storyteller, from what point of view
is the story told. And I think that just as much time and energy that we've been putting in
to the seven basic plots, each of these others warrant just as much time and study and energy,
because I think it's that fruitful. So I'm going to basically go over my theory of what these four
are, and give you a little bit of a roadmap to where I'm going in this comprehensive study of
story that I've been doing. I do hope someday that it will be a master's level class and a book.
But this is basically how I'm conceptualizing the whole thing.
Okay, so the different origins for these things. I just chose Christopher Booker and the seven basic
plots, because I thought that that was a good starting point. It's sort of my theory that
stories get refined and refined and refined over the years, and they get better and better and
better the more you retell it. The parts that don't really work, that don't really tap into that
mystical quality, that whatever it is that we need from story, are the ones that fade away and get
forgotten. And the ones that get perpetuated and retold and retold and retold get refined
in that retelling until they get very, very latent and potent with meaning. And so starting with the
seven basic plots, let me go back to this, starting with the seven basic plots, using a little bit of
the theory of Carl Jung, which of course his students were Joseph Campbell and Eric Neumann,
and that influenced Hollywood. And so all the movies that you see today are kind of really steeped in
and based upon this tradition here of the seven basic plots. Carl Jung himself was the son of a
minister, and so he was steeped in the Christian tradition. And so it comes from the Western, you
could say the Judeo-Christian Western tradition. It's all kind of this big river and stream that has
come down. And then when you go to the movie theater, when you go to the watch a TV show, or when you
read a book in our culture today, it's all kind of like downstream from that. So following these is
my attempt to kind of go upstream and to really kind of look at what stories do for us, why they
are the way they are, and what the repeating patterns are that we do find meaningful. Because
like I said, the ones that didn't fit those patterns were the ones that sort of fell away and
we forgot, and they weren't very helpful or meaningful to us. But now I think that it's
time, I'm going to finish up those lectures on the seven basic plots, but I think it's time to now
start looking at those other components, which would be character and atmosphere and viewpoint.
So this is what we've looked at so far, the seven basic plots. I've started with Christopher Booker.
I've gone beyond Christopher Booker in a lot of ways, taking the best of what I think he's done
in laying out these seven plots and trying to go even deeper myself, and then plotting them out on
the two-mountain system, the mountain of success and the mountain of legacy. So it has to do,
as you can see here, with the flow of time. Plot really is an exploration of how time moves forward
and how it kind of repeats. You've probably heard the idea that history does not repeat itself,
but it does rhyme, you know, something like that. And there's this idea that our lives have this
cyclical, these cyclical patterns, kind of like you've got spring, summer, winter, fall, spring again,
you know, and then you've got generations coming and going, young, you know, adolescents, midlife,
middle-aged, old, you know, you've got your mother, maiden, maiden mother, matriarch cycle of the feminine,
the feminine life cycle, and you've got your, you know, warrior, lover, patriarch side of maybe the masculine,
whatever words you want to use. You know, these different sort of ways of how these plots are kind of
repeating these patterns. And so my sense was, let's look at these and see how they kind of plot
out on the life cycle. And I do think that the mountain of success and legacy is a very good way
of thinking about it in terms of the first half of life questions and the second half of life questions,
the notion of taking in at first and then breathing out in the end. And what is the difference
between the pursuits of the first half of life and the pursuits of the second half of life?
Now, recently I was reading a commentary on the work of Carl Jung, and I came across
this little historical tidbit, which was that according to Carl Jung, Freud never made it off of
the first mountain, the mountain success, that Freud was primarily preoccupied with first half of life
questions, which has to do with success, money, and power. First half of life questions. You're
trying to get to the, you're trying to find who you are. You're trying to gather in wealth. You're
trying to learn success and competency, and you're learning how to be a proper ruler. You know, these
are all the things that I've talked about in these, in these first half stories, these archetypal
stories that take place during the first half of life are on that first mountain. But Carl Jung actually
had older clients than Freud, and a lot of them were post-midlife crisis patients.
And what he noticed was that their concerns began to shift. The other thing that he noticed
was this universal pattern of death and resurrection. And so when you finally get to
the second half, the second mountain, Carl Jung is saying that those are actually different questions
in the first half, different concerns. You're not worried about survival like you are in overcoming
the monster. You're worried about passing on your knowledge to the next generation. And in a way,
the, I don't know, I mean, the really profound part about it is that he discovered this pattern of
death and resurrection, that oftentimes after the king gets to the top of that first mountain,
then a real or symbolic death needs to happen in order for them to sort of be birthed into that
second half, onto that second mountain. And I do think that that's fundamentally what the quest story
is about. It's about bridging the gap between that first mountain and the second mountain.
And then the rebirth story is really, you could say, the spiritual component,
the spiritual concerns that you have in life that become the primary focus of that second mountain.
Now, it's not that you can't have spiritual concerns over here. And it's not like you can't
have a rags to riches that happens to an older person, you know. But I'm, these things,
these patterns are kind of more, you, you, you sit back and you squint a little bit and you kind of
look for general things that are happening. And that's sort of what I'm seeing is that oftentimes
they'll sort of just click in, uh, to these, to these different, uh, repeating patterns.
And so Carl Jung said, Freud never got off the first mountain, but I'm now, of course, in his second
half of life going to focus now on the second mountain questions. And what is the, um, essence
of this notion of a death and a rebirth that you see over and over and over and over and over.
So this is one thing that you're going to notice in, in, you know, I, I started lecturing on a little
bit with the Groundhog Day, uh, but in Dostoevsky, in Tolstoy, in, um, in, in, in all of these
different stories, um, you're going to see Dickens with, with, uh, with Ebenezer Scrooge characters,
um, this sense of dying to the things on this first mountain in order to be rebirthed into the
second mountain. So there's this shifting that happens rather than gathering in the wealth,
as in the case of Ebenezer Scrooge, you're now giving the wealth away, you know, rather than taking
in, you're giving it back. Um, so there's a real kind of inversion or shift that happens,
um, as you make this transition. Um, so, so I think that's, that's, that's a new,
a relatively new way of looking at it. I don't think, I mean, part of the reason why I embarked
on this whole thing was because I was somewhat frustrated with the writing instructions, the
screenwriting instructions that I was getting coming out of the books and instruction that you
get from Hollywood. Um, most of the good writers, it seems to me, were intuitively tapping into some
of these universal things. Um, but it wasn't enough for me. It wasn't spelled out enough. It wasn't,
I still had more questions, you know? So I think this notion of archetypal plots and different
phases within your life path and the, and the life cycle, and these repeating sort of fractal
patterns is, is, is a new way of thinking about it. And, uh, in a, in a way, this is all just a big
experiment to see if it produces what it, what I think it should produce, which is better stories,
more meaningful stories, more impactful stories, more healing stories. So that's,
that's my goal with all of this. Okay. So we have been looking at, um, plot so far. Now character,
uh, you can, you can sort of see where I'm going. It's this, it's a very similar, uh, idea.
The idea of universal stock characters or archetypal characters, prototypical characters,
very similar to the idea of the universal plot or a set of repeating plots. Um, okay. So let's take a
look at this. Um, I'm cutting off the word here a little bit, but that's okay. Um, so what you'll
notice is that you're going to find, you know, fairy godmother figures over and over. You're going to find
the good version of the female from the previous generation and the bad version of the female from
the previous generation, the fairy godmother and the stepmother, the, the, the, the one that has
your best interest in mind and the, um, the devouring mother archetype. Um, if you watch Lord
of the Rings and you look at Gandalf and then you watch Harry Potter and you look at Dumbledore and you're
like, okay, a bearded old man, wizard who does magic, who's a mentor figure to the protagonist.
Of course, you're going to see that all over the place. Um, the idea of the animus, um, uh, or anima,
I guess it is, which is the anima is the feminine version of the male psyche and the animus is the
male version in the feminine psyche. This is another concept from Carl Jung, but look at this in high noon.
Like if you go back and watch my lecture on high noon, you'll notice the symbolism here that
you're getting the, the dark clothes and the, the, the white dress and the black dress, you know?
So you're two halves of the sub personalities within the protagonist. Um, or you could look at
something in like in groundhog day where you've got Rita who really is the Beatrice figure.
She represents the feminine ideal, which is the notion of the muse or this feminine principle.
That's not out there in the world. So much as it's in the head, in the psyche of the male protagonist,
which draws them out of their, um, lower self and into a higher self, you know? So Beatrice in Dante
and Rita in Groundhog Day, that's a universal character. Um, now the question is, where do these,
where do these character prototypes come from? There is a book by a depth psychologist named
Clarissa Pinkola Estes, which is called Women Who Run With the Wolves. And she noticed that all of her,
not, or a good number at least of her female clients had a figure in their dreams that was the same
figure. And she called it the shadow man or the, the dark man archetype, which is, um, the, the best
way to kind of describe it is the murderer in all of the scream franchises, the guy with the scream
mask and the knife, showing up in dream after dream, after dream, after dream, and all of these
different women. So that's, that's the shadow version of the animus, the, the, the masculine,
the shadow masculine within the, within the feminine psyche. So there's something going on here. Now,
of course, I'm just starting on this, this journey, just like I was starting with the seven basic plots a
year ago, um, in trying to now untangle and kind of give us a nice map, a nice good sort of list or
or, uh, or set of some of these, uh, stock characters that show up. Um, another reason
why it's good to know, uh, if your piece that you're working on, for example, or if you want to
just be able to interact with something that you see, if it's primarily plot driven, meaning that
the characters are there, but they're not the thing that's driving it forward, whether, or if it's
character driven, where the plot really doesn't matter that much, a good example would be situation
comedies. So if you look at, uh, you know, Homer Simpson never changes situation after situation,
after situation, all kinds of different plots, but that's not really what's important about
the show. It's the figure of Homer Simpson, that archetypal, um, the fool character, the same
character is in the office in the figure of Michael Scott. So, so the, the idea of the, uh,
authority figure who might be a little pompous or unaware has a big blind spot and moving through
the world. And we, the audience can see that they're not seeing the full picture that they
have these blind spots and that creates the comedy that creates the, so whatever situation
they go into, they're going to retain those qualities and that's going to generate the comedy.
Um, and so if you were taking the seven basic plots and saying, I'm going to use this in my sitcom that
I'm writing, I would say, well, maybe that's not the universal part that you want to look at.
Maybe what you want to look at is the characters. Maybe you really, really need to understand, um,
how that works. Now, apparently in Italy, they, uh, you know, around the time of the Renaissance,
they would have these traveling plays and they wouldn't have a plot. They wouldn't really have,
you know, scripts written out, but they, what they would have are these stock characters.
They would have the, the beautiful woman that everybody's always chasing after, which,
you know, you see a lot in Shakespeare, Shakespearean plays. They would have the pompous
old man, which is kind of very similar to Michael Scott in the office. Um, they would have the fool
or the jester. Um, they would have all of these different characters with their masks and their
costumes. And then they would just basically do an improv of them interacting within different
settings and different scenarios. Um, and so in, in that case, uh, yeah, that, that's the,
the power and meaning of it is in the character. It's not in the plot. It's not the, in the,
in the order of events. So that's what I want to do after we're done with our, uh, exploration of the
seven basic plots is move on to character and start, I'm going to, I'm going to come up with,
you know, I'm, I'm, I use Christopher Booker to kind of categorize some of these archetypal plots.
I'm going to have something similar for character. I'm not exactly sure how that's going to play out
yet, but that's, that's my plan. Okay. So what about the atmosphere? Cause, okay, let me go back here.
So remember I said plot, that's what we've been talking about with seven basic plots character.
That's what I just finished talking about and atmosphere. Okay. So that's what and who now
we're down to where, which is the atmosphere, the setting of the story. All right. So the one thing
I want to say here is that the atmosphere is not, or the setting you might say is not as trivial as
you might think. Um, it's not just, are they indoors or are they outdoors? Are they at the
beach or are they at the forest? Some kind of a, you know, a physical background in which it takes
place of, you know, a time period, is it a period piece or is it a modern piece? You know, those are
all kind of window dressing issues. Uh, what I want to make the case to you today is that the atmosphere
is actually just as archetypal and just as meaningful and just as symbolic as our plots that we've been
looking at and the characters that we're going to look at as well. So how, what do I mean by this?
Um, now I've done one lecture on, on this idea, but I, but I, I think it's worth, um, it's worth
reiterating. Um, you can think of the world of story as having a landscape and each place within
that landscape has symbolic spiritual resonances. Um, and so a good rule of thumb would be to look at
the three-part, uh, structure of the cosmos, uh, which is mountain garden slash paradise, dry land
slash world of, of kings and rivals, and then the sea or the underworld or the domain of the
Leviathan, the digestive system of the cosmos. Um, if you look at the maps that authors will draw
of their world, you know, and you, you look at Tolkien's map of middle earth, for example,
you'll see middle earth, you'll see a kind of a garden area you'll see with the shire,
you'll see kind of a mountain paradise with, uh, where the elves live, you know, they just kind of
live up on the mountains and more of a paradisal, uh, existence. Um, and then you'll see the underworld,
which is Mordor, you know? So, so you're looking at essentially, um, a map that includes these
different, these different places. Um, and now, of course, you know, I've made the case before that,
that it's my contention that certain monsters live in, uh, different monsters live in different
parts of that, of that world, of that map. Um, so, uh, you're going to see some kind of a, a, uh,
a symbolic representation of what it is that's going on in these different places. Okay. So now there,
there's, there's, there's also a fractal component. It's, it's a little, uh, interesting to try to
explain this, um, in terms of the human body as well, which is represented, uh, not only in story,
but also in architecture, um, and in the way that we speak, um, which, which is head, heart, and gut.
Um, you'll notice this in Star Trek. Uh, you'll notice it in Lord of the Rings. You're, you're
going to find your elves, uh, your men and your, uh, dwarves. Uh, you know, I mean, you know,
J.R.R. Tolkien is so like, he's got good, he's got light and dark versions of both, let's say,
you know, just the same as I was talking about. Um, uh, someone like, uh, uh, Frank Herbert in Dune
is going to have all of these are character archetypes, good and bad represented, you know,
the, the, the good mother and the bad mother, just like I was saying with the fairy godmother
and the stepmother, the good father figure, the bad father figure. Um, well in Tolkien, you know,
he's got, uh, you know, basically, um, the, the good version of the higher beings like the elves
and then the corrupted version of those higher beings, you know, in, in the Nazgul and then the
good version of the, of the middle beings like the, the, the humans and then the bad version of
those, uh, in the, in the, in the orcs, you know, and then the good version of the lower beings like
the dwarves and then the bad version like the goblins, you know, and so there's this, things are
all starting to fit together in terms of, uh, the, the, not only the characters and different
roles that they're playing, but the places that they inhabit as well. And so I think that this is
also a very, um, worthwhile thing. Now it even survives in our language. So think of it when you
say, you know, I had an idea. What do you do? What, what, what do you do with your hands? What do you,
you, ah, yes, I had an idea. You're pointing to your head, you know, so you're talking about this,
what, this part of reality. You know, if, if the human is a microcosm for the cosmos, the cosmos has
a head, a heart, and a, and a gut, just like you have a head, a heart, and a gut. And then you can say
in literature and stories, there's a head, a heart, and a gut, and they can represent,
be represented by characters, but they can also be represented by places.
And so this is why I think the atmosphere sometimes can be, um, just as meaningful
as, uh, as all of those other components. And if you are a filmmaker, like someone like
Terrence Malick, you might say, okay, there's almost no plot. And really, even the characters
are pulled back a little bit and the atmosphere is going to start to manifest itself a little bit
more prominently. Think of the thin red line. And you've got what? You, you've got your notion,
your paradisal visions, you know, at the beginning of the thin red line, he's rowing his boat through
the beautiful, uh, you know, island paradise. Okay. And then where does he go? Where does he wind up?
He goes to war. He goes to, to, to hell, you know, and then he's got this middle land of, of, uh, of in
between those two places. Um, so, so this is, this is something that's going on, um, um, all the time.
So, uh, uh, garden paradise, dry land and sea underworld and head, heart, gut, um, becomes
another part. I'm going to give you one more example of this. I, if you go back and watch my
lecture on Chinatown, um, you're going to notice, um, that the, uh, the, the, the screenwriter
essentially wanted to do three movies. And the first one has to do with water, which was Chinatown.
The second one was going to have to do with land. And the second one was going to have to,
the third one was going to have to do with air. So, excuse me. Um, he only wound up making the
first one, but he wanted to do three. It's very interesting that he wanted to do three and that
they would correspond to these different locations. So in Chinatown, how do we know that we're dealing
with the sea slash underworld? Um, I'm going to show you a clip. I've shown this before.
If you watch my lecture on Chinatown, but I'm going to show you just a little bit of a clip
from Robert McKee here, where he talks about what he calls an image system. Uh, an image system
is, uh, when, when a screenwriter will take some symbolic element and put it into the screenplay
and it'll have it show up over and over to represent something within the screenplay.
And what is it? What is it? One of the primary things that, that they put that Robert Townsend
puts into, uh, Chinatown is water. So let's take a look at that. And like any fine novel
or play, a film becomes poetic by incorporating into itself an image system. This poetic system
must be more than subtle. It must be subliminal. The audience is not to notice. The moment the
audience reacts to an image as symbolic, the effect is destroyed. And I'm about to do just
that by pointing out that Chinatown has not one, but four such poetic systems that weave
throughout the film, enriching everything. The first is motifs of water versus drought.
And so you'll see and hear constant illusions to drowning, to fish, drinking, beaches, lakes,
reservoirs, steam irons, spit, the city's department of water and power. In this film, water is power,
and in the hands of a man named Noah. You may think you know what you're dealing with.
But believe me, you don't. Why is that funny? It's what the district attorney used to tell
me in Chinatown. The second system is sexual cruelty. There's only one instance of loving
sexuality in the film. All the rest cause suffering. Adultery, castration, sadism, incest, and horses.
A lot of horses, the universal symbol of sexual irrationality.
Did you talk to him this morning? No. I went riding rather early. Looks like you went quite a distance.
I was riding better back. Third, blindness or seeing falsely. Photographs, cameras, windows,
rearview mirrors, broken eyeglasses, binoculars, sunglasses, and eyes, especially the eyes of the dead.
Jake, what are you doing here? It's nothing, Morty. It's my lunch hour. I thought I'd drop by and see
who dropped dead lately. Yeah? Isn't this something? Middle of a drought and the water commissioner
drowns. Only in LA. Okay, so what do you notice there? He's putting water everywhere. So there's
this idea that Noah Cross, the primary villain in this piece, is trying to take our protagonist down
into the water, trying to drown him, trying to dissolve him down. Why? Because the protagonist is
locked inside of this world that he has created, this underworld. So the Jack Nicholson character is
stuck inside of this underworld, and what's down there is salt water and things that are going to
dissolve away your identity and dissolve away your physical body. You know, this notion of everything
that goes on down in the underworld. So you see, they go down to the ocean. He's got the salt water pond
where the person was drowned in the backyard. They go to Catalina Island. They're eating fish.
There's all these different sort of ways to clue us in that the landscape, the setting of Chinatown is
the underworld, or is Hades, or is hell, or is Gehenna. You know, it's that bottom part of reality.
So it's down here. This is where the story is set, and this is where the character goes. Okay, so
plot, character, atmosphere, and viewpoint. We're going to save viewpoint for another video.
So, um, but like I said, you know, I really do think that it is worthwhile digging into these
concepts and really trying to understand what's going on symbolically, metaphorically, with each
one so that you can really understand why it's there. Why do people go to the underworld in these
stories? Why is there this three-part system of the landscape of these stories? If you're writing a
story, you might say, okay, you know, here I am, I'm going to, I'm going to write one of these, I'm
going to use the template loosely, the, the, the kind of like, uh, you would if you're doing a jazz
song or a blues song, you're going to use that kind of aesthetic to create a rags to riches story.
You know, um, and that's only, and what I'm saying is that's only one part of it. You're going to also
want to know about these archetypal, uh, prototypical, uh, stock characters as well.
And what is their function? How do they work? Why do they do what they do? Why do they show up all
the time? And the setting, the places, you know, is there, are you going to have, uh, an underworld
in your story? Are you going to have a middle earth and a paradise? You know, are you going to have
interaction between those things? Are you going to invert them? Are you going to, you know, play around
with those notions or something, put a variation on it, whatever it might be. But I think it really
does behoove us to, to understand, uh, understand these things. So let's go back now to what it is.
All right. So plot is what, character is who, atmosphere is where, point of view is the storyteller.
And, um, hopefully this will help you in your movie watching as well. You know, if you're watching,
um, uh, Terrence Malick movie, you're going to want to really, really pay attention to this atmosphere.
Here, you're going to notice where it is that these characters go on journeys to. Um,
if you're watching the office or if you're watching parks and rec, or if you're watching
another kind of situation comedy, you're going to want to know about these archetypal characters,
um, just as much as you would with the plot. So, um, so I think they all fit together. And, uh,
again, this is going to be my ultimate story map, the ultimate story map. And, um,
once again, um, I'm basically using, uh, this, this YouTube channel as a experiment of source of
sorts. And, uh, and, and all of you watching as my guinea pigs here to see, um, if these ideas are
coming across, if they're resonating with you and if they're helping you in your creative work. Um,
I'm finding that, uh, more, the, the more people I talk to that are working on writing things on
creating things on, uh, movies and documentaries and novels and short stories, et cetera, et cetera,
that the more I get familiar with things, the easier is for me to help you make your piece
better. Um, the, the, the main idea here is to go from an idea, an initial idea that you have.
And then as you make your second draft, that your second draft is better than your first draft.
So many times in my grad school days and early writing days and whatnot, I would find that,
uh, the second draft is different than the first draft, but you really have no tools of knowing
whether or not it's better than the first draft. And what you want is each one to get better.
So I think all of these components, um, should really help us. I'm hoping that this is kind of
like shining a light on some of this. So you're not just feeling around in the dark and thinking,
well, here I'm creating a character, but I'm not exactly sure what they're supposed to say or what
they're supposed to do. Um, how I'm supposed to figure out what they're supposed to say and what
they're supposed to do, how they're supposed to act in a certain situation or not. And then the ones
that just sort of grab you, you know, where it's like, wow, that character, uh, is so compelling.
I just can't keep my eyes off of that person. You know, that's usually, um, because you've
inadvertently tapped into one of these universal timeless, uh, qualities. Um, and it's, and it's
going to resonate with people. And so I'm just trying to help you see what some of those are
so that your creative, um, endeavors can flourish within that landscape so that you can use all
those things for your benefit and, and you're like a tool so that you know what the tool is for.
So that's, that's basically what I'm trying to do here. So thanks for watching. And, uh, I'm going to
get back to the seven basic plots lectures again soon. I've got a couple in the hopper
here. It takes a while when you have a full-time job and you're doing this sort of thing on the
side, but, um, I'm still working on it. So, um, thanks for watching.
Bye.
Bye.
