than the liberal establishment are like headless chickens.
That NATO is a larger scale mafia that creates insecurity in order to sell protection.
What is even worse than Trump's plan is the liberal establishment's naive belief that
Trump has no plan and that he's just a fool.
The United States has killed assassinated leaders, it has overthrown governments, it's been responsible
for millions and millions of people who died by American bombs.
The latest of course is the genocide of the Palestinians.
So maybe we owe Trump a debt of gratitude for allowing us to turn against the white supremacist
settler attitudes of the United States, of Germany, of France, of the United Kingdom, even my country
Greece now, vis-a-vis the Palestinian genocide.
The anti-war movement, the pro-Palestinian movement is grasping that.
Hello everyone, I'm Rania Khalek and this is Dispatches.
Donald Trump's return to power is sending shockwaves through the global order.
But his economic vision isn't just about tariffs and trade wars, it's a calculated strategy
to reshape America's dominance.
While centrists dismiss him as erratic, his policies reveal a deeper understanding of
raw economic power.
What is Trump's master plan and how could it backfire?
Meanwhile, Musk and other tech billionaires aren't just funding politicians.
They are the new ruling class.
As capitalism gives way to techno-feudalism, with a world reshaped by cloud capital, what
does it mean for democracy, sovereignty, and global conflicts?
In Europe, the Trump administration is demanding more militarization, even as US elites openly
mock the continent's decline.
At the Munich Security Conference, European leaders practically wept over Washington's
shift in focus, proof, if any was needed, of their subservience to US empire.
But does Europe have any real sovereignty left?
From Gaza to Ukraine, from AI wars to economic shocks, the global balance of power is shifting
fast.
Joining me to discuss this and more is Yanis Varoufakis, economist, political leader, former
Greek finance minister, and author of many books, including Techno-Feudalism, What Killed Capitalism?
He's also co-founder of the international grassroots movement, DM25, and a professor of economics
at the University of Athens.
But before we jump into it, this is just part of this episode.
The full interview is available to Breakthrough News members only.
You can become a member at patreon.com slash breakthrough news.
And as always, be sure to hit the subscribe button and the bell so you get a notification
whenever we post new content.
And if you appreciate the show, you can also donate below on YouTube.
Yanis Varoufakis, welcome back to Dispatches.
It's very good to be back, Rania.
Thank you.
Well, there's so much to talk about.
And I think a good place to start because it just happened was the Munich Security Conference,
which you were at and around.
And I wanted to actually prompt you on a clip that's been making the rounds.
I think it says so much.
It's the chairman of the conference literally crying upon realizing that the US is distancing
itself from Europe.
So I'm just curious.
I'm going to show the video.
But I let me let me show the video and then I'll ask you my question about it, because
it's just it's it's definitely worth worth taking a look at.
Here it is.
After the speech of Vice President Vance on Friday, we have to fear that our common value
base is not that common anymore.
I'm very grateful to all those European politicians that spoke out and reaffirmed the values and
principles that they are defending.
No one did this better than President Zelensky.
Let me conclude and this becomes difficult.
So, OK, so there you have it, this man is weeping basically in front of this crowd.
So my question based on that video is, Yanis, what does this reaction reveal about European
elites and their understanding of sovereignty and America's power?
And how did Europe allow itself to become so dependent on the US that its leaders are emotionally
devastated by the prospect of Washington shifting focus?
Well, it brings to memory a movie I saw as a young child.
It was a South American movie.
I can't remember if it was Brazilian or Argentinian.
There was this depiction of a slave who believes very passionately in the institution of slavery.
And then the master at some point decides he's anti-slavery and releases him.
And the slave is bereft and cries his head off.
This is what we now have.
Of course, there's always a second reading or an underpinning to the story.
If you look, take for instance, since the gentleman was in Munich, and by the way, I call it the
Munich Insecurity Conference this year, you can see this everywhere, not only in the face
of that touchingly moved fool, because that's what he is.
But also, if you walked with us in the streets of Munich, we had 20,000 policemen and women.
We had a state of terror that descended upon the city, supposedly in the context of security
and peace.
It was nothing but warmongering, insecurity, a confirmation in the States of Munich that
NATO is a larger scale mafia that creates insecurity in order to sell protection.
And doesn't even do that anymore.
And that's why the gentleman was crying.
But let me speak to what I think is the underpinning of this vassalage of the dependence of these
gentlemen and some ladies on the United States.
If you're a German industrialist, after decades of harsh austerity upon the people of Europe,
not just in Greece and in Italy and in Spain and Portugal and Ireland, but in Germany, austerity
was created by the German elites, the German bourgeoisie, against the German workers.
They practiced it in the 2000s.
They practiced it immediately after the financial collapse in 2008.
It started in Germany, not in Greece.
Then when Greece, the Greek state went under, they brought it here, we treated us as a hyper
austerity guinea pig in order to take it back through Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Spain, France
to Germany.
When you practice this harsh austerity, essentially what you're doing is you are depressing demand
for goods and services in Germany.
So if you were running Volkswagen, if you were running BASF, or if you were running Alstom,
any of the large corporations, you would look out of the skyscraper of your magnificent offices,
what you would see is a mass of people who are impecunious, they don't have enough money
to buy your stuff.
So of course you don't invest.
And what you're trying to do is you're squeezing wages down in order to make your products competitive
and sell them to the United States.
And it is because of the exorbitant privilege of the dollar, the fact that the dollar is
the universal reserve currency, that allows the Americans, as a people, as a country, as
a state, essentially, to import other people's net exports at infinitum, without limit.
Because the United States has exorbitant privilege, they can just print the world's currency and
import, import, import.
This is a trade deficit that Donald Trump disdains, right?
And of course they pay with IOUs called dollars.
So if you're this industrialist in Germany, you can't depend on Germans to buy your stuff,
but you depend on Americans and you get dollars.
What do you do with the dollars?
You can't spend them in Germany.
You have to take them to New York, to Wall Street, there you buy American debt.
So essentially the American trade deficit through Germany funds the American army and the American
hegemony.
And it funds something else as well, real estate deals in Manhattan, in Miami, in California.
So the realtors in America, the finances in America, the German industrialists are all in
cahoots, they work beautifully together.
And this is why.
So for instance, you know, when the war in Ukraine started, you saw the devastation that was inflicted
upon the German industrial sector.
As a result of the blowing up of Nord Stream 1, that large pipeline that brought Russian gas
from Russia to the heartlands of German industry.
Now we know that this was blown up by effectively the Americans, the US together with Ukraine,
together maybe with some Poles, we don't know.
But it was certainly not done against the interests or the will of the United States.
That was a huge blow to German industry, huge blow, billions they lost out of that.
And they said nothing.
Why did they say nothing?
Why are they vassals to the United States?
I'm expanding upon your question.
Well, because they need the American trade deficit to keep sending their stuff there and
taking dollars and then pushing their dollars through Wall Street into American real estate
and US treasuries.
So this is why they are vassals.
And then of course, every economic dependence yields a psychological dependence.
And when suddenly the people that keep you rich, while your working class is being devastated
through austerity, and at some point say, you know, we don't care about you.
Because you know what, Mr. Schultz, Mr. Mertz, the next Chancellor is going to be a certain
gentleman, Friedrich Mertz.
That's what the opinion polls tell us about the federal election in Germany this coming
Sunday.
We don't need you anymore.
Because you know what, we have created new circumstances, new facts on the ground.
And BASF, Volkswagen, BMW, Mercedes, they will shift their manufacturing to the United States
in the same way that US manufacturing was shifted to China, your manufacturing is coming over
to us.
So don't give a damn about it.
So yeah, we're going to end the war in Ukraine without giving you a seat at the table.
Why are we going to give you a seat at the table?
You're irrelevant.
You have worked hard to become irrelevant, just strategically, politically, your working
classes turning to the right, to the outer right, to the fascist right, they become Trumpists.
So back it off.
There's so many different threads I want to come off of there, but I'm glad you talked
about the de-industrialization that has been pushed onto Germany by the US and of course,
the ruling elites of Germany have participated in, and that Nord Stream explosion that contributed
to that.
And it'll be interesting to see how Europe navigates its economic decline under this US pressure.
I want to come back to Europe though, because I think a lot of what you're talking about
also plays in to what you recently wrote about in an article for UnHerd where you argued about,
I'm sorry, about Trump's economic master plan, which I think is really important to understand.
And you argue in that article that Trump's tariff fixation is a part of a broader calculated
economic strategy, one that's risky, but actually coherent, unlike what centrists seem to believe
about it, which they seem to believe it's very erratic and makes no sense.
You actually described Trump and he's not often described this way.
You describe him as understanding raw economic power better than centrists do and recognizing
that economic dominance is not about marginal productivity, but about who holds power over
whom.
So I think this is a really important argument that you're making that deserves explanation.
So can you explain to our audience what is the underlying rationale behind Trump's worldview?
Why does he believe that the US is being exploited?
And what is his vision for restoring American dominance under this economic master plan that
you lay out?
Well, thank you for giving the opportunity to speak to this, but before anybody misunderstands
my position, I'm not agreeing with the Trump plan.
I am not endorsing it.
I think it's terrible.
But what is even worse than Trump's plan is the liberal establishment's naive belief that
Trump has no plan and that he's just a fool who accidentally took power from them and who
believes his own rhetoric and he thinks that tariffs will solve everything on their own.
And just like they did after Trump 1.0, when they simply sat back hoping that he would fall
and he fell as a result of COVID-19 and his utter mishandling of the pandemic, they are hoping
that, again, he will go away and eventually harmony will be restored in the heavens while
they return to the White House.
That's not going to happen because he has a plan.
And it is a rational plan.
It is a well thought out plan.
For me, it is a terrible plan in the sense that it works against the interests of the majority
of Americans and against the interests of the majority of humanity.
But we need to understand it before we fight it and the liberal establishment are like headless
chickens running around in the hope that somehow Trump is going to fail as a result of not having
a plan.
He's not going to fail because he doesn't have a plan.
If he fails, he will fail because there will be people and movements that oppose him who
understand his plan.
So I just wanted to make this clear.
Okay.
So what is the plan?
To begin with, to understand his plan, we have to understand his main gripe, his main discontent
regarding the state of the United States.
The vast majority of people around the world, and that includes me.
We believe that, and I think we're not wrong to believe that the United States has an exorbitant
privilege, and that is the US dollar.
The US dollar is the only currency in the world that is in demand, independently of what the
United States produces.
So the only reason why you want the British pound is if you want to buy something produced
in Britain, or if you want to go to Britain as a visitor, as a tourist.
Nobody else wants pounds, really.
Maybe for speculation, but I'm speaking to you from Athens.
When I put gas, petrol, in my motorcycle, even if it is a Greek company buying petrol from
a Greek or a French company that has purchased crude oil from, let's say, Libya.
So there's no American corporation involved at all.
That act of purchasing gas for my motorcycle increases the demand for dollars because oil
is denominated in dollars.
So that's exorbitant privilege of the United States.
It's what allows, as I was saying before, the Germans to keep selling their net exports
to the United States, the Chinese to do this, the Japanese to do it, and how this is all
recycled through Wall Street, and it becomes rents for their entire class in the United States,
it becomes rents for the bankers in Wall Street, and so on and so forth.
But Trump, while understanding all this and loving it, he loves the fact that the dollar has these
exorbitant powers for the United States ruling class, and he's one of them.
Nevertheless, he sees this exorbitant privilege also, or primarily, as an exorbitant burden.
From his perspective, he's a nationalist.
He doesn't like the fact that the United States can no longer build nuclear submarines because
you don't have an engineering sector anymore, you're not producing enough steel.
He once said, back in the 80s, in 1982-83, I saw a quote from him, that if you don't have
steel, you don't have a country.
And America is not producing steel anymore in any substantial quantities.
It's China, primarily, and also Germany.
So for him, this exorbitant privilege, which he adores, comes with the exorbitant burden
of effectively shrinking the United States.
But then he has also an economic theory behind it, which leads him to conclude that this exorbitant
privilege is not going to last long, that carnage will come to the United States.
And I don't think he's wrong on this.
His argument is this.
Now why does the United States have such a large trade deficit vis-a-vis Germany, Japan,
China, and so on?
Why is it that the market doesn't work?
Because if Paul Krugman and all the other liberal establishment economists were right,
that markets work to equilibrate through demand and supply prices, interest rates, and exchange
prices, the dollar should have fallen because America has a trade deficit.
Every country that has a trade deficit, its currency comes down.
But why is the dollar not coming down?
Because it has this exorbitant privilege, because people want it for other reasons.
But from the perspective of Trump's team, not just Trump, but he has a team of economists
around him who are not dodos, who are quite smart.
They may be evil, but they are smart.
And what they realize is that that's their thinking, that's their analysis.
That the reason why the dollar is not coming down is because the central banks of the foreign
countries, of foreigners, of foreign central banks, hoard dollars.
Now, why do they hoard dollars?
Because dollar is the reserve currency.
So when Germany sells cars to the United States, you have all these dollars going back to Germany.
And what happens with these dollars?
The vast majority of them, the dollars that are not returned by Mercedes-Benz to New York,
they are hoarded by the Central Bank of Europe, similarly by the Bank of England, by the Bank
of Switzerland, by the Bank of Sweden, by the Bank of Japan, by the Bank of China, increasingly.
Three trillion dollars is held by the Central Bank of Japan.
Three trillion, three thousand billion dollars, that's not to be scoffed at.
And why do they hold these dollars?
Why don't they convert them into their own currency in order to increase economic activity?
Because this is how they preserve their currency at low levels.
If you have a conscience, it's unbearable to be plugged into the corporate media machine
right now.
These outlets are accomplices in genocide, running cover for the war machine.
Breakthrough has become the go-to outlet for those who want something different.
But the funds we've used to start this platform are starting to run out.
We would never dream of turning to mainstream corporate funding.
So we're turning to you.
Become a patron.
For as little as five dollars a month, you can become an essential part of our fight to
not just break through the mainstream media, but create something that can challenge it.
We have to become completely viewer supported, or this platform we've built could go away.
Don't just watch us, join us.
Because when you hold these dollars, then the value of the dollar vis-à-vis your own currency
goes up, and the competitiveness of your export sector is enhanced.
And therefore, Trump says, you see, the foreigners are taking advantage of us.
We are gifting them the reserve currency which keeps their currencies down and keeps their
currencies backstopped.
Instead of holding gold or whatever, diamonds, they're holding our dollars.
In so doing, they are disadvantaging our exporters and they're advantaging their exporters who
are importing into the United States.
And therefore, you have the US trade deficit.
So here comes the story about the tariffs.
Now, conventionally, liberal establishment economists think that Trump is an idiot because he can't
see the tariffs can't work to eliminate the US trade deficit.
Their view is, and this is not wrong, where they are wrong is they think that Trump doesn't
understand it.
He doesn't understand it.
What the story is that, yes, you slap tariffs on Chinese aluminium or Chinese plastics or Chinese
clothes, right?
But that will increase the price that American consumers have to pay.
And that will jeopardize America's economy because it will push inflation up.
But that at some point is not going to eliminate the trade deficit because as this happens, the
dollar will go up.
And as the dollar goes up, in the end, American consumers will not be paying more because even
though they will have to pay the tariff, the dollar value will have gone up.
So what they pay in Walmart is not going to be greater.
Now, Trump knows that entirely.
I've, you know, I've read policy papers that are circulating amongst his team.
And they know this precisely and they love it.
You know why?
Because that's how they will get foreigners to pay for the tariffs.
Because here it is something that they state explicit in their policy papers.
We slap tariffs on them.
Their central banks will immediately reduce their interest rates to absorb the recessionary
shock to their own economies from our tariffs.
As they reduce interest rates, their currency is going to go down, the dollar will go up.
In the end, the import prices, the prices that Americans pay will not have changed much,
but something will have changed.
The trade deficit will not be eliminated, but one thing will have changed.
The foreigners will be paying us money.
They will be paying for the tariffs.
And that for the American, for the US administration, for the Trump administration is great.
Not only will they be collecting the tariff money, but remember, Congress, and particularly
the House of Reps, has the purse strings for tax receipts, but not for tariff receipts.
To increase the amount of money that the US government gets from the American taxpayer, Trump has to
convince Congress.
And there he has a very thin majority and there is just bedlam.
He really doesn't want to have to negotiate with Congress.
But the moment he slaps the tariffs, the stream of money goes to the Treasury without any negotiation
with Congress.
And indeed, he can actually even spend this money.
There are some legal impediments, but we know how much he respects those.
And that's phase one.
Nothing has been accomplished by the end of phase one to bring down the US trade deficit.
He has increased his treasury stake through the tariffs and he's made the foreigners suffer
and pay for it.
And now comes phase two, which is a grand negotiation.
Then he says to them, and this is not novel really, Reagan did that to the Japanese in 1985.
Reagan gathered everybody.
If you have ever heard of the so-called Plaza Accords of 1985, he gathered the European Central
Bankers and so on, but primarily he had the Japanese there.
And he put them under their thumb and said, similarly to what Trump wants to do, you're
going to revalue the yen or else, or I'm going to slap tariffs on you.
Now, Trump first slaps the tariffs and then says to the Chinese, to the Germans, to the
Saudis and so on, you are now going to revalue your currency.
But how?
You're going to take a chunk of the dollars that you're holding and you're going to sell
them.
That way you are revaluing, sell them for your own currency.
That way you will revalue the euro, the yen, the one and so on.
Alternatively, if you don't have that many dollars and the European Union, the Eurozone does
not have that many dollars.
It is the Japanese that have more than a trillion and the Chinese got three trillion.
If you don't have that many, I know you have US treasuries that are short dated, two, three,
four years are left in them before they expire.
I'm going to swap them, you're going to swap them with new treasuries that I'll give you
that are a hundred years in duration at low interest rates rates.
In other words, you will subsidize long term US interest rates.
And if you don't do that, I'm not going to remove the tariffs.
So in a piecemeal negotiation, he isolates one at the time.
He's not going to do what Reagan did, which is to bring everybody around the table.
He hates large negotiation rooms.
He's a one-on-one guy because that maximizes his negotiating power.
His power to crush his opponent when there's just one other person in the room.
And he's going to say to them, right, okay, okay, you choose your poison.
Either you're going to do as you're told, to revive your currency by selling dollars or
swap your debt, my debt that you hold for cheaper debt for me.
Or I will leave the tariffs there.
And whatever they say, Trump has won.
If they say, yes, emperor, we will revive your currency, he's chalked up a great victory.
If they don't, it's no great skin, large patch of skin off his nose because he can say, okay,
right, fine.
You keep paying the tariffs then.
Yeah.
It was a win-win for him.
You're right.
Yeah.
This is the plan.
It's a Findish plan.
It is clearly stated.
I'm not making it up.
There are documents where they are actually written down with quite substantial financial
engineering and engineering thinking and logic in them.
Now I'm not saying that his plan is going to work.
And I think it's not going to, I think it's going to fail in the end for political reasons.
Now, of course, whether it will work or not depends on social movements, on trade union
movements, on political movements, rising up against the governments that participate
in this deal with Trump and also within the United States.
And I think the ultimate failure of Trump is that, you know, sometimes, you know, the
expression, the most wicked of gods, of divinities, fulfills your dreams.
Now, similarly with Trump, if his dream is fulfilled, then he will have a serious problem.
Let's say that this plan works and the trade deficit of the United States is eliminated
through the revaluation of currencies, the debt swaps and all that.
Eventually, at the end of phase two.
Well, then his own brethren, his own tribe are going to turn against him.
Because the real estate people, the Wall Street financiers, make a mint today as a result
of the trade deficit of the United States, which comes back to the United States in the form
of a capital tsunami that goes into Wall Street, as I was saying before.
Now, if the trade deficit is eliminated, well, the capital that is now flowing into real estate
in the United States and into the financial markets will cease.
And then they will be very peeved with Donald Trump.
So Donald Trump, at some point, if his plan is successful, will have to choose whom to betray.
The American working class, to whom he promised manufacturing jobs, elimination of the U.S. trade deficit,
or his own tribe of realtors and finances.
Guess whom I think he's going to betray.
The working class.
Yes, well said.
I mean, historically, historical proof of that's how these things go down.
I want to segue into another aspect of the Trump administration that you are well equipped to explain.
And that is the role of somebody like Elon Musk.
I mean, you have argued that we're no longer in capitalism, but something more dangerous,
which you've called techno feudalism.
And you wrote a whole book about it.
So I've had you on the show to talk about this before, but I think it would be worth maybe just giving a brief explanation
to our audience of what it what you mean by techno feudalism and why it's not just another phase of capitalism.
And also where we are now in this transition.
Have we moved fully beyond capitalism to this this techno feudalism?
Or are we in an intermediary phase?
And then how do we throw Elon Musk in there?
Because he is one of our techno feudal overlords.
And some might say even perhaps our shadow president at the moment.
Okay, so what's techno feudalism?
The system that killed capitalism, which is also based on capital, however, take Amazon.com.
Amazon.com is not a market.
It looks like a market.
You get in there and there are hundreds of thousands of sellers and millions of buyers.
So it looks like a market, but it's not a trading platform.
Not the same thing.
A market has to have a degree of decentralization.
You and I walk down a farmer's market or in a shopping mall, right?
And there are many different buyers, different sellers.
We can have a chat with one another.
We can criticize what we see in a shopping window.
We can decide not to buy anything or to buy something.
You go to that shop.
I'll go to that shop.
We can talk to different sellers.
The moment you enter Amazon.com, nobody talks to anyone.
Unless it's mediated by the algorithm that belongs to Jeff Bezos.
And the algorithm only allows you to talk to people with a view to maximizing the likelihood
that Bezos is going to get 40% of whatever it is that you spend.
That's a rent.
Bezos doesn't produce anything.
I mean, it's wrong to compare and contrast Bezos to Henry Ford.
Henry Ford was a monopoly capitalist.
He wanted you to buy his Model T.
That's it.
He didn't want you to ride in a tram, in a streetcar, in a train.
He wanted you to buy his Model T.
It was his product.
The product was coming out of his production.
Jeff Bezos doesn't produce anything.
He doesn't give a damn what you purchase.
As long as you purchase, this is hit on Amazon.com because he retains 40%.
And this is rent.
Okay?
This is a bit like a feudal lord charging rent to producers like serfs, peasants, artisans,
ironsmiths, and so on, who were on his estate.
He was charging them rent.
He wasn't producing anything.
Right?
So this is the feudalism part of the techno-feudalism.
The techno part comes from the fact that this is not land that bestows upon our new lords
the right to extract rent.
It is digital land.
It is what I call cloud capital.
Because what lives in here for the first time is a new form of capital.
Capital goods up until recently, the last 10-15 years, like the production lines of Henry
Ford, the electricity cables of Thomas Edison, even the industrial robots which assembled
Elon Musk's Teslas.
They are all produced means of production.
Machines we produce to produce other machines.
Right?
But this is not a produced means of production.
It's a produced means of behavioral modification, of modifying your behavior and mine so that
we cultivate in our heads and in our bosom desires to buy stuff which then the same algorithm
sells to us directly in these platforms, bypassing real markets.
So if markets have been replaced by fiefdoms, cloud fiefdoms, and if profits have been replaced
by rents, or cloud rents as I call them, we are no longer in capitalism.
We haven't even realized.
Is this transition complete?
No, it is never complete.
Even capitalism was never free of feudalism.
Think of the plantations in the southern parts of the United States.
They were always feudal under capitalism.
So the transition is never complete.
Is it complete enough to call this new system techno-feudalism?
I think absolutely yes.
And you can see this in the inauguration or was it coronation of Trump 2.0.
They were all there.
They were all there.
Because they were being humiliated by Trump because he had them there to humiliate them.
But he chose them to be there because they are the ones who own the cloud capital, which bestows upon the owners of cloud capital, these folks, the greatest power to extract value from the rest of the economy.
And, you know, so my point is that there is both in China, which has a lot of this cloud capital, the big tech China is very impressive.
And we saw this recently with DeepSeq and the furor that it caused the Wall Street and Nasdaq.
And in the United States, these are the two countries that have lots and lots of highly concentrated quantities of cloud capital.
This is why we have a new Cold War between the United States and China, in my view.
We can see both in the United States and China that there is a clash within the regime between traditional capitalists and these big tech cloudless or tech lords.
In China, the Communist Party sorted it out.
They took somebody like Jack Ma, who had created the Chinese Amazon called Alibaba, and they said to him,
enough, your power has exceeded the limits of our tolerance, out you go.
And we squeeze your capacity to extract rents from the rest of society.
In the United States, that would never happen because they own the government.
They own the government.
And you see these raptures now within MAGA, within the Trumpist camp.
You have Elon Musk impersonating the Vice President of the United States or the President of the United States in the Oval Office.
But you also have somebody like Steve Bannon, who is the true ideological guru of the MAGA movement.
And I was horrified to find that he's read my book and he actually agrees with it.
Oh, I mean, Steve Bannon, there's some weird Venn diagrams.
The term of techno-feudalism to attack Elon Musk, because this is a civil war happening within the MAGA movement.
Do we have a stake in who wins, by the way?
Is it preferable between us two who wins?
You know, the whole point here is this.
I do believe that the techno-feudal laws have to be defeated.
And this is the number one priority, because they have a power that no monopoly capital has ever had.
It's a power that is hardwired into our brains through dopamine secretion and so on.
And therefore, they're more dangerous.
But at the same time, I'm appalled that people like Steve Bannon, who I consider him extremely smart and extremely eloquent,
they're more dangerous, because like the Mussolini's of the 1930s,
he has a capacity to understand the fears and trials and tribulations of the working class,
and to co-opt them in a nationalist, sexist, misogynist, anti-Palestinian, anti, you know, what?
Equality, just anti-equality.
Equality narrative that, you know, the problem is, I mean, the same way that the Nazis would say the problem is the Jew,
now the problem is the asylum seeker.
Or, you know, instead of using the N word, now they use DEI.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I'd say it's really, it's really insane the way you describe that, too, because you had Elon Musk,
Jeff Bezos, Mark Zuckerberg, all of them, you know, front row seats at the inauguration.
And you've also had like Zuckerberg do this 180 understanding, you know, you have to like kind of bow to whoever's the new president,
where, you know, he went from trying to be like liberal to now being like, yeah, we're not going to censor news anymore or whatever to try to please Trump.
But of course, you know, this trend also isn't isolated to the US, the Bannon, Musk, that sort of like a fight and the rise of these techno feudal lords.
It's happening across the West alongside this rise of the far right that you just alluded to.
I'm just curious, how do you see these forces converging?
And maybe this is a good segue into some of what's happening in Europe, too, because it seems like all over the place, you know, those of us on the left are really struggling to push back and challenge all this stuff
because we're being suppressed and we're much weaker than we were decades and decades ago.
Whereas these Steve Bannon types really are able to successfully co-opt the middle class, the working class into this nasty politics to take their legitimate grievances
and make them blame immigrants. And I mean, it just seems like around the world.
That's the trend we're seeing is the rise of the far right and the incapability of obviously liberals to do anything about it because they end up just feeding into it.
But certainly the left has not been able to put up a fight.
I mean, we're up against a lot, but it has not been successful.
It's happening, as you say, in parallel in Europe and in the United States.
Another reason is one that we should find easy to understand.
You know, I can't stand people who say, oh, it's too complex. It's not too complex.
It's actually really dead simple.
2008 was our generation or so, 1929.
If you enjoyed this episode and want to hear the rest, you can access it by becoming a Breakthrough News member at Patreon.com slash Breakthrough News.
