I am not claiming that I have any knowledge of the probabilities of what will happen.
I'm much more interested in possibilities rather than probabilities, in what we have been capable
of doing, but which isn't necessarily easy or likely to happen. We are on a pathway towards
ecological and technological self-termination, but I don't think it's a definite route. It's
not cast in stone that that will happen because we know that throughout history, we have managed
to change systems, to recalibrate how our economies and our politics works. And that's why in
this book, I talk about the idea of radical hope, which is being committed to making change
even if you think the odds are against you, to always act as if change were possible. Because
imagine getting to the end of your life, regretting the fact you hadn't taken action when it may
have been possible to change.
I am pleased to welcome Roman Kriznarek to the program. Roman is a social philosopher and
the author of many books such as The Good Ancestor, Carpe Diem Regained, and most recently History
for Tomorrow, Inspiration from the Past for the Future of Humanity, which is the subject
of today's conversation. Roman is a senior research fellow at the Oxford University Center
for Eudaimonia and Human Flourishing, as well as the founder of the world's first Empathy
Museum. He is a member of the Club of Rome and a research fellow of the Long Now Foundation.
He has previously worked as a gardener, a conservation activist, and on human rights issues in Guatemala.
Another trivia about Roman is he is the husband of frequent TGS guest, my friend, the renegade
economist Kate Raworth. In this conversation, which I expect will be the first of several
because we just scratched the surface, we delved into what we can learn about societies
who have succeeded in the face of crises during the last few centuries and how we can apply
these learnings to the global crises we face. We especially dove into social innovations in
the realm of governance and community organization. Um, and it's a, it's a big topic that I want
to unpack more in the future. If you are enjoying this podcast, I invite you to subscribe to our
sub stack letter when you can read more of the system science underpinning the human predicament,
where my team and I point out special announcements related to the great simplification. You can find the
link to subscribe in the show description. Also, if you learned and enjoyed from this podcast, I encourage
you to send it to a couple people in your community, uh, ask them to watch it or watch it together and
have a conversation, uh, about, uh, what you learned, the implications for where you live in our world.
Uh, with that, I am pleased to welcome my new friend, Roman Krasnarek.
Roman Krasnarek, welcome to the program.
And it's a great pleasure and privilege to be here, Nate. Really looking forward to the adventure
of our conversation.
What was the quote you just told me, uh, off, off camera?
I was just telling you that the great historian Theodore Zeldin once said to me,
a satisfying conversation is one in which you say things you have never said before.
And I'm sure this will be one of those.
From both our perspectives, perhaps. Um, so you have written many books. Uh, it seems
that you read, you write a book every three years or so. I wonder if it takes three years to properly
write a book. Um, among the better known ones, The Good Ancestor, Carpe Diem Regained, uh, but one
that's just come out history for tomorrow inspiration from the past for the future of humanity will be the main
topic of, of today's conversation. In this book, you cover lots of topics, including water shortages, inequality,
AI revolution, genetic engineering. However, I would like to focus the discussion on governance and movement
building based on your learnings from looking at the past thousand years ago. Um, so first though,
what, what inspired you to take this particular take using an applied history approach to the
current myriad crises that, that humans and our planet face?
Sure. So for the last 10 years, I've been writing a series of books, like a trilogy,
about humanity's relationship with time. So, uh, one of the books you mentioned that The Good
Ancestor was about our relationship with the, with the future. Carpe Diem Regained was about our
relationship with the present. And this new book, History for Tomorrow is about humanity's relationship
with the past. And these are all explorations of what I think of as temporal intelligence. So,
you know, that Daniel Goleman concept, you know, from the 1990s, emotional intelligence. Well,
I think we need to nurture temporal intelligence, by which I mean the human capacity to think on
multiple time horizons, different modes of time, linear, cyclical, backwards, forwards. Um, and I think
particularly one of those areas where we're lacking temporal intelligence is about thinking about our
relationship with the past. And I think we all know that our politicians, our policy makers are so
caught in the tyranny of the now, you know, they can barely see beyond the next election. Most of them
will be on the latest tweet or opinion poll, or they are looking to the future. They're crossing their
fingers and hoping that the tech bros in Silicon Valley, um, are right in thinking that technology will
sort out our problems for us. And here we are in an age of poly crisis or meta crisis, depending how
you define these things, climate and nature, emergency risks from AI and genetic engineering,
threats to democracy, growing inequalities. And the one thing I feel our politicians and policy makers,
many NGOs and so on, are not looking at and not recognizing is that history is one of our greatest
resources resources for thinking about the future of humanity. And in a way, you know, it's not a new
idea by any means. You can go back to Thucydides, the Islamic thinker Ibn Khaldun, Machiavelli, Hobbes,
Goethe, in the 18th century, the German writer Goethe said, he who cannot draw on 3000 years
is living from hand to mouth. So there's an idea that, that the past, the wisdom of the past, the way
we have faced crises and challenges and built cities and civilizations is a source of nourishment, hope
of inspiration. And that's what I've tried to do in this book. And of course, one other sort of key
aspect of this is that, you know, often we hear that famous George Santayana quote, you know, those who
cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it, which is an idea about learning from the warnings
of history. And there are plenty of great books that look at the warnings of history. Tim Snyder's
book on tyranny, for example, great historian looking at interwar fascism, how we shouldn't be repeating
what happened between the wars or books about the heritage of colonialism and how we can move beyond
that. And what I've tried to do is not just look at the warnings from history, but to look at
the moments of possibility, the moments of inspiration, look at what went right as much as what went wrong.
And so I found history, like Goethe, a source of nourishment for seeing where we can find ways
to tackle these multiple crises facing humanity this century. I'm really looking forward to getting
into some of your learnings. But let me ask you a kind of a tangential question. You mentioned the
importance of temporal experience, how we relate to time. And for the first generation, perhaps in our
species history, we have the ability to understand and perceive deep time and where we came from
and the grand arc of big history that brought us here. But at the same time, with social media and
TikTok and supernormal stimuli, our attention spans are less and less able to look at the last thousand
years or the last 500 million years. So is the relationship with time changing because of our
social media? At the same time, we have the scientific tools to understand and research what happened in
the past. What are your thoughts on that? Yeah, it's a great question because the concept of deep
time, that human beings are just an eye-blinking the cosmic story, is a new idea really. It only
comes really from the late 18th century, when geologists started seeing all those layers of rock
and realizing that when the Bible said that the Earth was created a few thousand years ago, well, maybe
there was a question to be raised about that. But of course, even though we've known about deep time for
a couple of hundred years, the geologist's hammer has lost out against the iPhone. The acceleration
of time due to communication technologies has been far more dominant as a social force than the idea
of deep time itself. Hence, we have moved from the factory clock of the 19th century to the nanosecond
speed share trading of today. Of course, the short-termism of today has even deeper roots going back to
how we began measuring time in the 15th, 14th century. The mechanical clock started slicing up
time first into hours and sets of 15 minutes. By 1700, most clocks had minute hands. By 1800,
they had second hands. But I think what's going on today is a recognition that we need to think longer.
I mean, this is a big topic in my book, The Good Ancestors, and there's lots of reasons for this. I think
the climate emergency itself has helped us think beyond the here and now and acted somewhat as a
counter to the nanosecond speed share trading. Just think about all those IPCC reports doing
long-term predictions about sea level rises and temperature rises on a scale, looking at 30 years
ahead, 100 years ahead, 200 years ahead. If you think back to forecasting as it emerged in the
1960s and 70s in business and other fields like companies like Shell, maybe they were looking 5,
10, 15, 20, 30 years ahead, not much more than that. We're starting to think longer in many ways,
but there is still a cultural battle going on between the short and the long. That then raises the
question, well, can we think historically back in time as well as forward in time? I think what's
really interesting, if you even think about your own life, Nate, if you think about the year your
grandmother was born, maybe that was however many years ago, 80 years ago, 100 years ago.
People are obsessed with tracing their family lineages, even going back several generations when
they can. We have this capacity to look back. Look at the popularity of history podcasts or
history documentaries. Even though we are constantly checking our phones and having our dopamine stimulated
by the social media barons, we also have a capacity to pause and breathe and think long. Look at the
obsession of people reading historical biographies as well. I think there's hope for thinking
historically. We just need to nurture this part of our temporal intelligence. It's not like we don't
have the capacity to do it. What do you think? Well, what I think is, I find it kind of bizarre that
it's taken me two years to have you on the program, is what I think.
Well, I've been listening to your podcast for ages. We are all fans in my household,
as I think you know. Well, for viewers that don't know,
In Your Household is also another former guest, the economist Kate Raworth is your wife.
Thank you for both of you listening. In your book, you touch on the idea of moving away from telling
history based on the biographies of great men. Can you explain what you mean by that and why that's
important? Sure. In the 19th century, the British historian Thomas Carlyle said that history is
but the biography of great men. It was this idea that the way societies change, the way we shift,
is through the role of the exemplary individual, the politicians, the great political leaders,
the key religious figures. That idea has been so powerful. That is partly why people today still
read biographies of Churchill and Napoleon and Nelson Mandela. I think one of the benefits of the rise of
Marxist history in the mid-20th century, particularly after the Second World War, was the recognition
that history also changes due to the impact of collective action, organised social groups, class in
Marxist sense, though that of course is too narrow because we also have other ways that people organise
themselves around different identities. Since the Second World War, we've had the rise of what's
sometimes called history from below. The idea that collectivities can shape the past as much as great
individuals or as much as new technologies as well. In the British tradition, you've got historians like
Eric Hobsbawm, Christopher Hill. In the US tradition, think of a book like Howard Zins,
of People's History of the United States, a multi-million copy bestseller, which tried to recast the story in
the US since 1492 from below, looking at the perspective of enslaved people, of workers, of women, of
Native Americans. I think that's important. What I'm doing in my new book, History for Tomorrow, is I'm focusing
as much as I can on that history from below. The reason to do it really has to do partly with
collective agency and a sense of what can I do. I'm a reader of a book. I'm a citizen of the world.
What can I do? If I'm told a story about the past that it's only the great leaders who can change
things or it's only cataclysmic events like wars and pandemics which change things, things out of my
control, then maybe there's nothing I can do about anything. Yet, I think there's a very powerful
way of thinking about history, that history from below attitude, the idea that social innovation
is as important as technological innovation, which tells us that we can shape the contours of our times.
So, kind of how we read history may be a microcosm of some of the broader hierarchical social challenges
we have today because the winners write history. We've heard about that. And so, we look at history
from the great, notable biographies of great men that you mentioned earlier. But the reality is that
there were all kinds of other things underpinning those eras. And we hear less about those in our
geography and history classes. It's about Napoleon and things like that. So, just out of curiosity,
for this book, was this mostly things that you had interpolated and figured out on your own over
time? Or how many books did you actually have to read to get this bottoms-up perspective on history
to write this one? Oh God, hundreds of books and articles, you know.
Literally hundreds? Wow.
Literally hundreds. Some of them I read during the last four years of writing this book. But
a lot of them, like Howard Zinn, People's History of the United States, has been with me for 20 years.
When writing a book like this, I am not a professional academic historian. I've got a PhD in political
science. My background is very much about thinking about political institutions and governance and
some of the sociology of politics as well. But I've always tried to look at the world through
the historical lens, at what human civilisations have done and not done. What are we capable of?
I have had to draw on the work of extraordinary experts. This is a book that's got discussions of
witchcraft in Germany in the 16th century. It's got discussions of the circular economy in Japan in
the 18th century. It's got discussions of alternative forms of democracy in West Africa in pre-colonial
times. I cannot claim to expertise in all of these areas, so I have had to rely on people who've spent
years in the archives, in a way acting as a kind of ambassador of the past. A lot of academic
historians, I think, are a little bit afraid about trying to connect their work to the present day,
even though a lot of them are doing it because they believe it matters. If you talk to someone
who's writing about enslavement in the 18th century in the United States, they may not write about its
relevance to racial injustice struggles today. They may not directly do that. Some of them do,
but most of them are engaged in that issue because they think it speaks to today. In a way, I've tried
to draw out some of these stories, some of which I knew, many of which I didn't. I love the surprising
things, the stuff I knew nothing about, and those things that have inspired me, I've also put in the
book. Other than people reading your book, how can we culturally move away from the biographies of
great men view of history to the, there were lots of bottoms-up responses for social innovation and
change? Is it an education thing? Is it a personal experience thing? How do we get to shift that
perspective? Yeah, I'd like to see a world where the idea of applied history, like applied science, is
taught in schools, in elementary school, to elementary years. There are university courses
increasingly on applied history, but they tend to be quite conservative. They tend to focus on,
let's learn from the history of warfare and international diplomacy. In Harvard there's a
big centre on this, but why not also learn from social movements and collective action more broadly?
I think we need to do all of those things, but I'm a book person, so I tend to write books,
not make films, and there are many ways of doing it. Do you read science fiction ever?
I'm totally obsessed with science fiction. For example, the author I've read most of in the last
decade is Kim Stanley Robinson. I've got a shelf about three foot long of his books. Just to pick out
one science fiction author amongst many, I think he's completely brilliant and one of the most
important political writers in America, is someone who thinks about the past as much as
he thinks about the future. You find this amongst some of the great sci-fi writers who might be
writing about the 24th century, but they can also tell you about medieval society. Ursula Le Guin was
another one of these great sci-fi writers whose knowledge and thinking about history and anthropology
were really extraordinary. Why do you ask? Are you a sci-fi person?
I am. I am. But the reason I asked is I wondered if the Isaac Asimov Foundation trilogy where they
talk about the concept of psychohistory is akin to what you're talking about, applied history,
that we can learn kind of some fundamental aspects of what it means to be human and then maybe overlay
Marvin Harris' superstructure, social structure, infrastructure in different cultural milieus to come
up with actually categories of interventions based on what our study of the past suggests.
Yes and no is my answer to that. I love Asimov. The idea of psychohistory is so enticing, but
in Asimov's work, history was the basis for a new statistical science. I am not claiming that I have any
knowledge of the probabilities of what will happen. I'm much more interested in possibilities rather than
probabilities in what we have been capable of doing, but which isn't necessarily easy or likely to
happen. I think that some of the good stuff that's happened in the past has not been all pervasive.
There are models in the past that we can look to. If I think about the human future, I remember once
listening to one of your discussions with Daniel Schmachtenberger. He used a phrase along the lines of
that humanity is on a course of ecological self-termination. We're on that pathway. I too
believe that we are on a pathway towards ecological and technological self-termination, but I don't think
it's a definite root. It's not an iron law. It's not cast in stone that that will happen because we know
that throughout history we have managed to change systems to recalibrate how our economies and our
politics works. Again, I'm not saying this is very likely to happen. That's why in this book I talk
about the idea of radical hope, which is being committed to making change even if you think the
odds are against you, to always act as if change were possible. Imagine getting to the end of your
life and regretting the fact you hadn't taken action when it may have been possible to change.
So going back to someone like Asimov, I'm not trying to create a science of learning from history. I'm
trying to think of history not as a mode of clairvoyance, but more as history as a suggestion for what
might be possible. It's like it's an Overton window of possible social innovations.
Yes, that's a really good way to put it.
We need examples of how to be altruistic or how to innovate. We want to, but if we don't have
examples of what worked in the past, I think it's like there's a test showing that if people see
an altruistic act with their own eyes, they're 300% more likely to do something altruistic. I think
that maps onto what you're saying. That's a really fundamental point about being able to witness
the altruism. Because again, when I was writing this book, History for Tomorrow,
some of the most striking examples of learning from history are ones which
are examples of history that's still with us today. So just to give you one instance of this,
if you go to the Spanish city of Valencia on the east coast, outside the west door of the cathedral,
every Thursday at 12 noon, you can witness a ritual known as the Tribunal of Waters, the Tribunal
de las Aguas. This is a water court, a grassroots from below water court, which may be Europe's oldest
legal democratic institution. Eight black cloak figures sit in a semicircle outside the door of the
apostles, Thursdays at noon, and they wear these black cloaks. Each of them is a democratically
elected representative of one of the local irrigation canals, which are part of the Valencia
agricultural hinterland, which provide all the Valencia oranges, which can be found over Europe.
It's very important. It is an example of managing scarce water resources. They fine the farmers who maybe
violate the rules. Again, there are public hearings for this. This institution has been around for
hundreds and hundreds of years, meeting on Thursdays since at least 1500. It's an
institution that goes back even earlier. It's an example, of course, of what Eleanor Ostrom called
the commons. It's a living history. When people see that, I think that's a way of thinking,
okay, if they can do it in Valencia, where else could we do something like this?
That will bring me even further afield from, from your book maybe, but I think the importance of
ritual, uh, especially ritual connected to ecology and nature and the commons, as you say,
is something really overlooked in our society of frenetic pace, social media, just in time delivery of
stuff from a six continent supply chain. So that, that ritual aspect of it, that in Valencia, you can go
and, and see that and it's been going on for centuries. I think we, a lot of us feel like we
miss that. Um, you have any thoughts on that? Well, yeah, I think that we need to invent rituals for a
ecologically sustainable future. I think it's a really important point because
the tribunal of waters in Valencia is indeed a ritual or think of the Subac water management system
in Bali, which I don't write about in the book, but there's some really fine writing on this book by
Stephen Lansing called perfect order. And in Bali, they have something a bit like the tribunal of
waters, a kind of a system for managing a scarce resource, but there are rituals around that kind
of, there are rituals around worship at water temples in Bali and things like that. And I think that's
something that's missing from people's lives in a hyper individualistic atomized society, but we need to
connect rituals to a kind of different ecological mindset, to a kind of biophilic rituals that we
need to invent. And I happen to live in the city of Oxford in the UK, not Oxford, Mississippi, or any
other Oxford. And Oxford has maintained a few pre-Christian festivals of connections with nature, which
are highly ritualistic. So on May morning, the 1st of May, in the city I live in, people dance on the
streets decked out with ivy wrapped around their heads and dressed in green. They are celebrating the
fecundity, the nourishment, the rising of the spring and the coming of the summer. It's a kind of harvest
festival. And me and my partner, Kate, and my kids, we all get dressed up and we dance on the streets at
six in the morning. And it is a beautiful moment. But then by eight o'clock, the cars are just coming
and going and the buses are back and it's totally disappeared. And I think we need more of that in
order to, in a way, embed the kinds of ideas that we're talking about, that you've been talking about
on this podcast for all of this time. Would you agree with that? I would totally agree with that.
But I have a, a dark asterisk on it is, is those things happen and they interrupt the cars and such.
Is that going to be a threat to the momentum of the superorganism of fellow British citizen Roger
Hallam has, has just been sentenced to prison for making a speech. That's a more extreme version of
what you're talking about, but the ecological rituals at some point may, um, have a very small
overlap with business as usual. I hope not. Um, and, uh, yeah, I mean, I, I totally agree with you
sentiment wise. And I think globally, suddenly at this 11th hour, there is a recognition of our kinship
with nature and, uh, uh, slowing down and reconnecting with others and, and with natural
systems. I feel that, but I feel like I'm also maybe in a, in a minority group that talks about
it and champions it. Yeah. Well, I completely agree with that. I mean, I certainly don't think
that reviving or recreating or inventing new kinds of nature rituals is enough to, it's not enough to
just go on a pilgrimage to Stonehenge a couple of times a year when you've got the, that superorganism
bearing down on you. You know, I think we need a plethora of, uh, approaches, including disruptive
social action, the kind of thing that Roger Hallam's been doing. We can maybe get onto that.
But I do think that, you know, one of the ways I think about this is I think, you know, we all,
we need a biosphere, which provides the, the air that we breathe, but we also need to think about
the ethnosphere. What I think of as the ethnosphere, which is the cultural air that we breathe, the
sets of assumptions and, um, beliefs and worldviews, the Weltanschauung, which shape
what we think and don't think, what we do and what we don't do. And the idea of rituals are part
of reconstituting the ethnosphere. A book like I've just written is also part of that too. It's in the
world of ideas. Um, but of course, the story of history is not just ideas changing things, but it's also
about collective action. It's about various kinds of disruption. So the superorganism is not going to
be scared of me dancing, uh, with some ivy wrapped around my head, but that is part of a different
narrative still.
In conversations around your house, how do you decide who gets to speak for how long? Because both
you and Kate have a lot to say. Like, is that ever a problem that you're finishing each other's
sentences and such?
It's funny over the years, our work is growing closer and closer together. I mean, I began in
the 1990s really involved in human rights activism and working with indigenous people in Guatemala,
writing, uh, articles in politics journal about measuring the quality of democracy and so on. And
Kate came from the perspective of development economics, um, working for the human development
report, the United Nations development program. But over time, our interests have slightly merged.
She kind of led the way really on, um, learning about the importance of ecological economics,
which of course is something that you've gone into very deeply. I was a late comer to that,
to reading Herman Daly. For example, when I read Herman Daly, it blew my mind, um, to recognize that
economy, society, politics is a subset of the ecosystem. And to get that to go in deep into my
bones has taken even longer. Um, and you know, another key thing for me was reading Bill McKibben's
The End of Nature, a book he published in 1989. I didn't read it till 2003. Um, and, but it absolutely
shifted my thinking. And in that sense, Kate and my own thinking started getting closer together. So when I
think of, well, what should the goal of humanity be? I, yeah, I think of doughnut economics, but I'm
also interested in, well, what are the mechanisms to get us there? Um, you know, so I'm very much
thinking about what are the kinds of political institutions that we need to create a doughnut
style economy? Um, and, and I like drawing on history in doing that exploration.
Well, well, let's get into that because one, uh, area, um, well, all areas so far,
but one area I particularly agree with you, um, is that understanding, uh, and mitigating global
collapse of, of, of various systems. There currently is a really large demographic of
what shorthand we might call techno optimists who believe that the energy transition is merely
switching out the bad energy, uh, with good energy and that innovation will save us.
But in your book, you talk about social innovation and, and in my opinion, the energy transition is
much more about how we use energy than what kind of energy it is. So, so why don't you break it down
for us? What is social innovation the way you talk about it in your new book? And do you have a
particular potent example on how it has propelled a civilization in the past towards rapid change?
Yes. So I think one of the ways that people often think about how history shifts is through
technological innovation. It's the spinning Jenny, it's the iPhone, it's the combustion engine.
But I think that if you look through the annals of the past, the rise and falls of civilizations,
the comings and goings of nations and empires, I think we can see that social innovation has been
just as an important force. And by social innovation, I mean the human capacity to organize
themselves in movements, uh, to commonly manage, um, resources to develop shared ideals for the
common good. And these social innovations come in many forms. So you've got the kind of slow burn
social innovations, the ones that take a long time to develop. So things like that Valencia water
tribunal I mentioned, the rules to develop how to manage a common resource like water, um, very
deeply embedded there as our commons management, um, rules in many other spheres, the kind of things that
Eleanor Ostrom wrote about, you know, managing forestry in Switzerland or fisheries in West Africa.
So that's one form of social innovation, something like the principles by which we
manage common pool resources, you know, who can have access to them, what are the rules for those
who violate and so on. And then we've got other kinds of social innovation. So think for example,
of the rise of social movements and trade unions in the late 18th, 19th century, a way that, you know,
workers particularly organizing around the workplace to create change. So the second half of the
19th century in Europe was a huge shift because of the rise of the trade union movement. You had
all sorts of legislation around limiting the work day, the eight hour day, the creation of the weekend,
work safety, all of that coming out of a form of social organization. And then you've got social
movements like the, the, the, the, the uprisings of, uh, enslaved people in Jamaica in 1831. So slave
uprisings, all these things have been a form of organization, which didn't necessarily exist in
the same way, uh, you know, 2000 years ago, um, but have, have emerged since and have been potent.
And then I think a third really interesting category, um, and there are many categories of social innovation,
innovations in the economic sphere, particularly around mutual aid and the rise of cooperatives.
Again, you can think of the 19th century, go to somewhere like Emilia-Romagna, the region in
Italy, which today it's a region of 5 million people today, about one third of the economy is
based on cooperatives and steward owned companies. And about one third of people are employed in
cooperatives and steward owned businesses. And these emerged from the 19th century, even kind of earlier,
um, a different kind of model of organizing, um, how we provision ourselves. So all of these are
different kinds of forms of social innovation and what they have in common is something that
the great Islamic historian from the 14th century Ibn Khaldun recognized, which is the importance of
what he called Asabiya, Asabiya, A-S-A-B-I-Y-A, which is an Arabic word meaning collective solidarity or group
feeling. And this historian, one of the first great historians Ibn Khaldun in the 1370s, um,
he was a, he was a famous judge from North Africa and a legal and historical scholar.
And he went to, uh, spent a few years in, uh, Algeria, what is today, Algeria in the early 1370s. And
in a little bit like the, um, British historian, Edward Gibbon, uh, in the 18th century,
he went to Rome and saw all these crumbling buildings, um, and wondered what explained the
rise and fall of the Roman empire. And he wrote a famous book about that, of course, the decline
of all the Roman empire. Ibn Khaldun did the same thing in the 14th century. Um, he was surrounded by
crumbling castles in North Africa and thought, where have these civilizations gone? What explains
their rise and fall? And in his famous book, the Mokadima, um, his book on history, a cyclical
theory of history, he said, well, the reason civilizations tend to rise and fall, the key
reason is because of this term, Asabiya, collective solidarity. He mentions it more than 500 times.
And basically he said that civilizations, which thrive, which are strong, which have resilience,
have a very strong social glue, social trust, modes of collective action and social responsibility.
And those which tend to crumble, uh, are ones where that social glue, that Asabiya
falls apart. So he looked at the, you know, the Islamic regime in the south of Spain in the 13th,
14th century began to fall apart partly because of growing wealth inequalities where the rich got
richer, the poor got poorer. We know that old story. Very few civilizations can survive for a long
time with those kinds of long-term inequalities. Very clear, um, finding from the study of, of
civilizational collapse. Um, and it was about a kind of social solidarity, collective solidarity. So
I think when you go to Ibn Khaldun, something so obscure, it seems that concept of Asabiya, I think,
captures the importance of social innovation, uh, as opposed to other forms of innovation.
Does the concept of Asabiya, which I would say today, um, broadly has been, um, religion can have a
collective, uh, purpose and also economic growth, um, globally, the last 50 years, the rising tide of
energy surplus and innovation have, have lifted all tides, uh, all boats, but, but can it apply to
things that are longer term and distant, like an ecological crisis? Because when we, um, look at
climate change and species loss and insect loss and declines in sperm count and all that stuff, it's,
it's, it's hard to get a collective Asabiya around that. Um, also in your book, you wrote that
most turning points, uh, in history stem from an externally derived threat like war, disease,
um, or resource shortages or something like that. So how do climate change, biodiversity fit into this
historical model, or is this a, a no analog, um, example? Yeah, that's a really great question because
I think the, if you read someone like Ibn Khaldun today, you know, a 14th century historian,
there's something really missing fundamentally, I think, from his analysis of civilizational
rise and fall. So he focuses on that Asabiya, that social solidarity or what might call, um,
intra-species solidarity. What's missing is inter-species solidarity. In other words,
our relationship with the ecology around us on which our civilisations depend. So when I think
about what are the fundamentals of helping us to, to bend rather than break, to use, you know,
some of your terminology, which I think is so fantastic. Um, how do we bend rather than break?
Well, I think we need three things. One is we need the Asabiya, we need the intra-species solidarity.
We need to have ways of acting collectively and being able to support each other through tough times.
But we also need a hyper sense of interdependence with the living world. Um, that kind of biophilia,
that inter-species solidarity, if we are going to recognise that we need to create societies which
exist within planetary boundaries or exist or work with the cycles of the living world.
And then the third factor we need is we need to have a capacity to respond effectively to crisis,
right? And I've got a model of that, we can maybe talk about that, called the disruption nexus. But I
think on the, the topic of that inter-species solidarity, interdependence with the living world,
one of the things I've tried to emphasise in this book, and I have no easy way around how do we do
this, right? Um, it's one of the big and difficult questions, but I do think-
If you did, I would be sceptical, but go on.
Yeah. I mean, if I, if I look at some of my own writing in the past, like my book,
the good ancestor talked a lot about indigenous cultures, um, and, and that idea of kind of
interdependence, the idea that you can find in many indigenous cultures that, um, that the rivers
are not a resource, they're our relatives, or the idea of seventh generation decision-making,
which can be found amongst Haudenosaunee people and in other cultures. Um, and I'm very inspired by that
very much, but I'm also thinking that it's very important that in Western hyper-capitalist culture,
we try and find the elements of that biophilic interdependence inside our own cultures, in our own
histories, because it's not that far away. Because I think there's a, a false story which has been told
about humanity's relationship, um, with the living world over the last say 500 years. And that story
is that we have become increasingly alienated from nature by the industrial revolution, basically.
And that Christianity has played into that through the idea of the domination of nature. Um, the machines
of the industrial revolution did that by sending us into the cities and disting us from, um, the living
world and treating the earth as a resource for exploitation. And that's all true, but there's a
parallel story, which is, and there's an absolutely brilliant book on this by the, uh, British historian
Keith Thomas called Man and the Natural World, um, 1500 to 1800. And he says that there was a parallel story
of just as we were becoming alienated from nature, at the same time, at least in parts of Western Europe,
there was a sense that we needed to reconnect with this thing that we were losing. So you had the
rise of things which might seem trivial, like the rise of recreational gardening, 16th and 17th century,
the obsession with tree planting across Germany and England in, in the same period. Um, you get people
starting to write nature journals like Gilbert White's Natural History of Selborne, all of these things.
And then at the same time, you had the preservation of some of these rituals,
like I talked about earlier, like May Day, connecting with nature. And those rituals are
right across Europe, in Estonia, in Sweden, in Germany. Um, and so I like sort of thinking,
let's try and reconnect with those things that are already in our culture, as well as those things
which are in other cultures, which are equally inspiring. And, but that's only the beginning.
And just one final thought on this. You mentioned religion. Um, religions have been the most powerful
force in human history for giving us new values, um, for creating visions of change. I'm not a religious
person by any means, but what I recognise, um, is that I think the global ecological movement, as it has
emerged since the 1960s, is basically a massive, decentralised religion, without calling itself that.
That you've got all these different movements to preserve wildlife. Some of them are very
conservative. Some of them are more radical, which are about people scaling coal-fired power stations.
But all of them have something in common, which is a kind of sense of the worship of the earth,
of Gaia. They may not say that on their websites, right? But that's kind of what they're doing. And
that's something quite hopeful and interesting, um, that gives me hope for that sense of interconnection,
but then trying to mobilise it is another thing.
Well, you claim not to be a religious person, Rome, but, but it sure
sounds like you're, uh, a devotee of what might be called animism to me.
Actually, I really like animism, actually. I, you know, but I like coming to animism through science.
Right out my window, above the screen that I'm looking at, are two ash trees. Now, those ash
trees provide enough oxygen for eight human beings. So, I realise that they are my external lungs.
So, we have this kind of mythology that our bodies kind of end with our skin and bone. But when you open
your mind to the idea that the trees are my external lungs, or that I'm breathing in argon atoms, which
were breathed in by the Buddha and Jesus and Cleopatra, um, David Suzuki, the great Canadian
environmentalist, is very good at talking about this. That science, for me, is a route into the kind of
interconnection with the living world, which I didn't get culturally. You know,
I happened to grow up in Australia, and I did have some exposure to indigenous culture through
my grandfather, who gave me, in fact, when I was eight years old, I met one of Australia's
great indigenous writers, a man called Gubala Thaldon, um, also known as Dick Ruffsey. He wrote a
book called The Rainbow Serpent, about how human beings were born out of the rocks and, and, and the
rivers and the desert. But really, that stuff isn't deep in me. So, going via science is actually, I
think, quite a helpful route for a lot of people. At least, that's how, that's what makes me feel
connected on a kind of more existential level to a sense that I am not just this body, but a real part
of me, the living, breathing part of me, which part of who I am, is something bigger than that, a kind
of, you are, therefore I am. I don't know, how, how do you feel about your relationship with the living
world? Do you feel that kind of, um, culturally, do you feel that connection with the kind of landscape
that you live in, or, or the world that you are part of?
The cultural part is, is brand new. I've always felt a biophilic, uh,
camaraderie kinship with nature from when I was three or four years old, uh, nature and, and the
hikes in the forest were my cathedral. Uh, and I then approached it from a scientific perspective,
you know, EO Wilson and, and, um, Bill Plotkin and, and many other writers.
And now only recently am I looking at the cultural ecological connections, uh, the way you describe.
And I do feel like at this 11th hour, our species, our culture is starting to remember these things,
uh, from our, from our ancient past. And I just hope it's not too late and the tsunami of finance
and geopolitics and depletion and, and other things doesn't, uh, um, snuff out the ember of this,
of this awakening, because this is a species level conversation. We're at this real critical
juncture of, uh, you know, what, what are the seeds that we plant for, um, our children and, and the,
you know, the unborn children of many other generations, uh, and other species.
Yeah. I, I think about it a lot. Well, here's the other thing. I've always loved nature. Uh,
when I left wall street to pursue this path, my dad referred to me as his environmental wacko son
to his friends. I wasn't right. But now like we go fishing, I went fishing in Canada a few weeks ago
with, um, 13 of my male relatives. We've done it maybe 40 times since I was, uh, young and we catch
some fish and we eat some and we let the rest go. But now I'm starting to like empathize for the fish's
suffering. And I think about it. And if we have to dispatch them to eat them, I want to do it as
quickly. And like, I think about what other species, uh, you know, even worms or chickens or
foxes. I, I, I empathize from their perspective, which I never did when I was younger, even though
I cared about nature. So something is happening in me talking to people like you and other scholars
and recognizing the fragility of the biosphere and the safety of the zone of the Holocene that we've all
accepted as permanent kind of in our culture and it's not, and it's at risk. So I'm, I'm kind of a
maelstrom of different emotions on this is some days I, I revel in the beauty of the natural world.
And other days I view it as a snapshot in the movie and I anticipate the later scenes that are
going to be unpleasant and that gets me down. Um, so that's my answer to your question.
You're, you're like, Kate, I'm going to have to have you back and interview me in the future.
Um, always ready to do that. Always ready to do that.
So, so one of the ideas I got from your book, um, is that there's kind of a, a, um, a clearing house
of ideas from the past that we can apply to our current situation. And the way that I see it is there's
this, um, steps of higher, uh, height and hurdles to get to where we're going. The first step is
understanding the meta crisis and, and how everything fits together. Just loosely you squint and see it.
And then the next step is caring. And obviously you and I, uh, in this discussion are, are voicing
our care for nature and the natural world. And I think a lot of followers of this show are, are past
those two steps. And then the next hurdle is what the hell do we do and as individuals and as a
culture. So, um, during the rest of this episode, um, and I've, I've not even gotten to 90% of the
questions that I had planned on asking you. That always happens to you that you say that in every
episode. Do I? Yeah. Well, especially the ones I'm, I'm interested in. Um, but I want to take a
deeper dive of your learnings from the past that are applicable and let's start with, with governance.
Um, so you have entire chapter dedicated to democracy and as it happens in my country,
we have a major election coming out in a, in a couple of months. Um, and you argue that it's
actually by design in a representative democracy system that we don't have an electoral option, um,
that, that we support. So in your opinion, do you think we've over amplified the weight of the
representative part of representative democracy? Um, and what are the most viable open society,
democratic alternatives you've studied from the past that we might be able to lean on or learn from
with respect to what's coming our way? Yeah. So where I start with thinking about democracy is
certainly recognizing that the political systems that we have today, particularly representative
democracy were designed in the 18th and 19th century in a different era to solve different
problems. They were a replacement for, um, aristocratic government, monarchical government.
Um, and they have seemed to be, as far as I can tell, absolutely hopeless at dealing with the
ecological crisis that we face. You know, we know that, you know, since the alarm bells about CO2,
and that's just about CO2, not materials, you know, started to ring with the Rio earth summit in 1992,
what's happened to global carbon emissions? Well, more than doubled. Um, we clearly have political
systems which are dysfunctional when it comes to dealing with crises that are very long-term in
particular. There's this sort of slow burn, slow violence of the ecological emergency. Um, and so
we need to look for different kinds of systems. And look, you can have all the sustainable development
goals and targets or whatever that you like, but if your political system is still caught in short-term
cycles, you're not going to get very far. And I, I find it slightly, um, frustrating, a lot of
discussions in the, in the ecology sphere, which are not taking the politics seriously enough. So
I think it's really important to recognize that the representative democracy that we have invented
in the 18th, 19th century was designed to exclude people, not to include them. And what I mean by that
is that when the framers of, you know, the U S constitution, the French revolution, uh, parliamentary
democracy in England were doing their thing, they were scared of the demos, the people. Um,
they were scared of direct participation. So they developed a system called representative
government, where you would have expert politicians who would, um, be the voice of the people because
they didn't trust the people. You can see this in the U S context, in the writings of Madison. Uh,
you can see it in a whole load of other writers across Western Europe. So let's just first recognize
that the representative system is just one particular way of organizing our governance,
which is actually designed to exclude or that functions to exclude people. And then if you start
thinking historically, are there other modes? Now I used to teach in universities in the late 1990s,
early 2000s, I used to teach political science, democratic theory and history and all that kind of
stuff. I thought I was an expert in democracy. I wasn't because I didn't even realize that we were
basically just pushing one particular mode of democracy, representative democracy,
um, and that there are other forms through history, which have been kind of written out of the story.
Um, you know, Winston Churchill famously said, well, democracy is the best form,
the worst form of government, except for the, all the other forms that have been tried from time to
time. But he was blind as well to the other options because by democracy, he meant representative
government. So where do we look for history in history for other options? Well, the one obvious place to go,
of course, is to ancient Greece, which everybody knows that ancient Greek democracy, well, a lot
of people know that one of its traits was, it was exclusionary, excluded women, it excluded slaves,
it excluded immigrants, but it's two key forms of decision-making were really important. One of them
was what they had. They had a form of assembly government. In other words, anybody could turn up
almost every week to the pinnocks, which was their decision-making body, any male citizen. So that meant
about 50,000 people and they could vote. Sometimes 6,000 people would come and make a decision.
So it didn't, they weren't, they didn't have elected representatives in the way we do today.
It was direct participation, right? That was one aspect of it. The second aspect they had,
former government they had is what's called sortition, which is selection by lottery, selection by lot.
So for the 500 key positions of what was basically the legislature or their Congress, as it were,
was effectively chosen randomly by random selection of Greek citizens. And it was a very effective
system. It lasted, you know, at least a couple of hundred years. And it wasn't the only, the ancient
Greeks who did this. I mean, if you look in the Renaissance, Republican Florence, before it got taken over by
the Medici dynasty, they selected their major political positions through lottery as well,
like the ancient Greeks did. Or if you go to Switzerland in the 16th and 17th century, in fact,
when I was researching this book, I discovered this country in effect, which I'd never heard about. It
was called the Free State of Rhaetia, spelled R-H-A-E-T-I-A, or the Republic of the Three
Leagues. I'd never heard of it. But between 1523 and 1799, a group of, a region in Switzerland
basically had a form of grassroots assembly-style democracy, a bit like ancient Greece, what they had,
but it was more sophisticated. They had about 250 local neighborhood assemblies where anyone could
participate. Men, yes, but all men, so cow herds as much as merchants. They would make decisions for
local issues like local taxes or whose turn it was to clear the Alpine paths. And then for more
important decisions, they sent delegates, not elected representatives, but delegates up to the next level
of 49 communes. And then they had a federal assembly that met a couple of times a year. And it was
basically what today we would call an anarchist form of government, really. If you look at the writings
of Murray Bookchin, the social ecologist from the US who died some years ago, he was very interested in
these kinds of alternative democratic models, which were grassroots. And that very model, the one in the
Free State of Rhaetia in Switzerland in the 16th, 17th, 18th century, actually has been replicated today
in various parts of the world. The most important is if you go to northeast Syria today, the area known
as Rojava, in the middle of a war zone, basically, the Kurdish people have created a form of assembly
government based, in fact, bizarrely on the ideas of Murray Bookchin, the great social ecologist,
former anarchist thinker. Their leader, Abdullah Ocalan, read Murray Bookchin, read about the ancient
Greeks and Greeks and thought, this is a better way of running a society than by having a revolutionary
Marxist overthrow of the state. Grassroots politics functioning for several million people,
it's completely extraordinary. And I know you've got questions now, so I'll just hold back from
talking about citizens' assemblies, which is another thing. Well, no, that's where I was going. I mean,
we could spend the entire interview on this topic because I have so many questions and insights
and constraints. I mean, the first is I think this fits who we are as an evolved social tribal ape.
And it makes sense to me, but I think certainly I don't know that this would work with
centralized, financialized economic growth for 8 billion of us. But I think it could work in some
post-growth, more bioregional future sort of thing. But it also depends on the education and understanding
of what we face by the people that are chosen in the assemblies. Because if everyone doesn't
understand climate change or the fact that two ash trees give enough oxygen for eight people, then
worse decisions will be made. So go on and tell us about a citizen assembly or follow up with what
you're saying. The challenge here, this is the first time we've ever spoken and there's way too much to
fit into a 90-minute interview because I love it all and I have questions on it all.
Yeah, I will try to be succinct. I think your question is very fundamental and I like your
skepticism and I think it's absolutely right to be skeptical about, you know, there's a real danger
of cherry picking examples from history and thinking that we can just sort of place them in today's world
to deal with today's problems. And, you know, this is always a problem of analogical reasoning. We need to
look for similarities and differences, that every dictator is not another Hitler, every war is not
another Vietnam. But when it comes to citizens assemblies, that ancient Greek tradition which
continued in Europe has re-emerged amazingly in the last 20 years. So the idea of randomly selecting
citizens to talk about issues is undergoing an extraordinary renaissance. And that renaissance
really in many ways goes back to Ireland in the 2010s, where they started reviving the idea of the
citizens assembly. And they famously had a citizens assembly on the hot topic of abortion, a very hot
topic in Ireland that the politicians didn't want to touch. But they randomly selected about 100 citizens
using a kind of algorithm to make sure that you had a mixture of old and young and people from different
ethnic backgrounds and different ages and different parts of the country. And they discussed this issue
and they recommended that there should be a referendum to change the constitution to make abortion
legal. And that referendum was passed. And that Irish example then kick-started a wave of what's called
deliberative democracy, which is direct participation through random selection. Across European countries,
there have been more than 250 citizens assemblies in the last decade. A lot of them have been on the
climate issue. Some of them have been on AI or on aging populations. And they're really fascinating
because if I'm trying to think about them in a positive sense, I do believe they're the most exciting
innovation in democracy since the extension of the franchise to women in the early 20th century.
Fabulously interesting and exciting, the fact that there have been hundreds of them. But, and you
know this as well as I, they are highly problematic in many ways. So the way that they tend to be
structured at the moment is that politicians set up the assemblies, invite citizens to have a discussion
about something. The citizens come up with a bunch of recommendations and then the politicians
basically often ignore those recommendations because it's not binding.
What's interesting about citizens assemblies is they tend to come up with much more radical and
transformative policy proposals than regular politicians. The French Climate Assembly and one
in Spain, they put forward the proposal that ecocide, the violation of the living world,
should be a crime in national and international law. One of the reasons I got interested in this was
thinking about long-term decision making when I was writing my last book because there's very strong
evidence that citizens assemblies tend to take a longer view than the politicians caught up in
short-term cycles. What we're facing now is a question about how can we bring citizens assemblies
into a more institutional place in politics and so that they're not ignored by the politicians.
So in East Belgium now, they have a permanent citizens assembly. Brussels now has a permanent
citizens assembly on the climate. In Gdansk in Poland, the mayor has said that any citizens
assembly which has more than 80% of people voting for a proposal, they will put it into practice.
These are baby steps in a large change of politics. Let's see how far we get with citizens assemblies.
What do you think?
Here's what I think. I've always said that I am a fan of local currencies,
not that they're going to replace the US dollar or the British pound, but because of the social capital
they create. And I think the same thing applies to citizen assemblies is ostensibly the proximate
reason for them is to have better decisions made with the politicians. But ultimately, especially in
the times that we face, you are organizing and getting to know other people where you live and
talking about the issues of the day. And that may be the ultimate benefit of scaling citizen assemblies.
I think. So how does someone listening to this in Topeka, Kansas, or Grand Marais, Minnesota,
wow, let's try to start a citizen assembly where we are? Is there a checklist or a way for people to
start that?
Yeah, I think it's an absolutely great point that the purpose of a lot of this is to sow the seeds of
asabia, of social trust, that glue. I think that's partly what's going on. It's about building a new
society in the shell of the old that maybe when particular moments of crisis happen, we are ready
in terms of social solidarity, in terms of new economic and political visions, having an ecosystem
of currencies rather than a monoculture of currencies. Anyone can set up a citizens assembly
in their own town. In fact, lots of towns are doing this even when the politicians are not doing it.
Extinction Rebellion, the direct action movement in the UK, has started trying to say, well, let's just
set up our own citizens assemblies and have public hearings. In fact, I talked about that Valencia
Tribunal of Waters. Well, partly inspired by that, in Latin America, a body has been set up called the
Latin American Tribunal of Waters. It's not an official government body, but it's a kind of a
community-based organisation, an NGO in effect, which holds public hearings. For example, when a big
corporation wants to build a dam in Honduras that will wipe out the traditional lands of Indigenous
people or something like that, they hold these public hearings which get enormous media attention
and which help build the social capital to create change. So I think you're absolutely right that
we can, I think there's enormous possibility for this, but also, and this is going to sound a little
bit way off, but you may not know, but when I left academia, I started working with this historian
called Theodore Zeldin, who I quoted at the beginning of the conversation. He set up an organisation
called the Oxford Muse, spelled M-U-S-E, and it was invented to create conversations between strangers,
and to overcome social divides, to overcome the hyper-individualism of neoliberal consumer capitalism.
What I did for several years when I left academia was I used to organise these things called conversation
meals, where we would invite strangers from a city, maybe a hundred people, sometimes a thousand
people in a public park, we'd invite them for a meal, rich and poor, black and white, you know,
different religions, and instead of giving them a menu of food, we gave them a menu of conversation
with questions about life on it, like, what have you learned about the different varieties of love
in your life, or in what ways would you like to be more courageous, or how have your priorities
changed over the years, and it was like the opposite of speed dating. People would talk for an hour,
not for a minute, but the purpose of a fun activity of community building was a deeper one about
recognising how social change happens, which is that if you and I sit down and have a conversation,
and I see the world from your point of view, if only for a moment, and you see it from mine,
we create a microcosmic little bit of equality, and this is a mode of change and a mode of holding
societies together in difficult times, so anyone can put on a conversation meal. In fact, there's
brilliant projects around the world which do exactly this. Yeah, that is brilliant. I was going
to ask whatever happened to that Oxford muse, because that's sorely needed in today's world, things like
that. Yeah, I mean, the Oxford muse, I left it after three or four years, it still puts on some
of these conversation meals, but there have been lots of other ones which have been spawned since
then. The big ecological project in the UK called the Eden Project, which is a kind of like a biosphere
that you can go and visit as an eco-tourist, they set up something called the Big Lunch, where hundreds
of thousands of people on a particular day in the UK each year, in their local communities, put out
chairs and tables in the streets, and they simply have lunch together. It's totally brilliant. I
think it could be improved with putting menus of conversation on the table. That's what I'm
into. In fact, historically, in a sense, this is what we did. If you go back to the coffee houses of
the 18th century, and I write about this in my new book, History for Tomorrow, the coffee houses of the
18th century, which exploded in popularity in London, there were over 2,000 of them in the early
1700s, when 50 years before there'd been none, one of the things that they had was a communal table.
And on that communal table, you would sit with a stranger, and the communal table would have on it
periodicals and pamphlets, so the printing revolution helped with this. But these were places where
strangers, not of very different social backgrounds, but of relatively different social backgrounds,
mostly men, so it had its limitations. They would discuss the big ideas of the day, republicanism,
anti-slavery. That's where Daniel Defoe and Tom Paine were doing their thing. If you just think of,
again, I'm thinking of the UK, but in the UK, there are 30,000 coffee shops right today. Imagine if
they were using, imagine if you put in communal tables in each of them, and there were just 10
conversations between strangers a day, that would make over 100 million conversations
a year. I think that's actually quite interesting and as important and serious as thinking how we're
going to tax carbon. There's 30,000 coffee shops. How many pubs do you know offhand? Probably more
than 30,000. Yeah. I mean, the question is whether we can convert the pubs into conversational hubs.
In fact, you could probably change churches which are dying out in this country, sort of traditional
Anglican Church of England. But there's all these social spaces that we need to reclaim.
I think for building asabia, for building resilience, for having conversations, for sharing
communal food. Because again, as you say, this is about
actions which don't necessarily change the system right now, but they start eroding it at the edges.
And so that when the time comes, we have enough of that social capital to rebuild, reform, but it's part
of bending, not breaking, for sure. Speaking of bending, not breaking, does your applied history
and the hundreds of books and such that you read on the last thousand years offer you any
vantage or speculation on what's going on right now in the UK with the immigrant murders and the chaos in
the streets over this past weekend? Today's Monday, August 5th. Is there any lens from history that
you can apply to that situation? Yeah, I think there are lots of lenses from history. I mean,
I've got a whole chapter in my book on the history of migration. Because as we know, by 2050, it's possible
that there will be one billion people who are migrants, one in 10 people. That's partly due to
climate change. It'll be due to the impacts of AI, automation, all sorts of things like that.
And we're going to have to find ways of living together on a scale which people are going to be
moving on a scale which we have not seen since the shift from the countryside to the city in the
18th and 19th century in the Industrial Revolution. If you look at the history of that, well, look at the
history of Chinese immigration in the United States, for example. When you had Chinese migrants started
coming in in the 1840s and 50s, fleeing the Taiping Rebellion and Civil War in China, coming to the
gold mines, coming to build the railroads. Well, as soon as the economic crises hit, like in the 1870s
in California, boom, you start getting lynchings of Chinese immigrants, right? And the burning of
Chinese quarters, you've got the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, I think, the first piece of federal
legislation to exclude a particular ethnic or cultural group. So what we're seeing partly today
is something similar, is that when you have moments of economic instability, when people can't pay their
mortgages, when food and energy prices are going up, well, the first targets are the outsiders,
of course. And you see this, you know, replicated through history. But I think that's partly what's
going on today, that you target the outsider, who isn't actually the cause of your fundamental
problems. Because we know that migrants, fantastic economic data on this, tend to be
net beneficiaries in terms of government budgets, because migrants tend to pay more taxes
than the average person, they take less from the social system in terms of social security,
you know, education and health. So that they're net contributors to budgets, but that's not how
the issues that are framed. But I think there's something really important here about this
particular moment, what's happening in the UK, but more generally about the importance of crises
for creating change in history. And I really love to just say something about this for a moment,
because if you think about how civilizations change, what makes them survive and thrive?
One thing, as I mentioned, you need is that social glue of asabia. The second thing you need,
I think, is the interdependence of biophilia, of the living world. But the third thing you need
is a capacity to respond to crisis. And, you know, I've been so frustrated over the last 15 years,
20 years, thinking of all these ecological crises going on in the world, the wildfires in California,
floods in Bangladesh, melting ice sheets, record temperatures in the Arctic, and yet our governments
still don't act. Well, why not? Well, of course, if you look at history, governments tend to act on
certain kinds of crises like wars or pandemics, these sort of very big ones. But most crises,
there are too many reasons not to act. So I became really interested in what is it that,
what are the contexts in which you get rapid transformative change to deal with an urgent
issue? What is needed? And I think what's needed is what I call in my book that the model I've
developed is called the disruption nexus. So imagine a triangle with three corners. In one corner,
you've got some kind of crisis like the 2008 financial crash or, you know, the heat waves
across Europe last year, a climate-induced one. And then in a second corner of the triangle,
you've got disruptive movements that can amplify the sense of crisis which push the politicians to
change. And then the third corner, you've got new ideas or visionary ideas in society which can
inspire the movements which become relevant at the moment of crisis. I don't quote Milton Friedman
very often, but as you know, he famously said, you know, a crisis is an opportunity for change,
but the actions that are taken depend on the ideas that are lying around. So if you get those three
things together, that is when I think you're most likely to get change. If you think of just one
example, Berlin, 1989. Why did that wall come down? Well, because there'd been protests for years and
years and years, right, from movements from below. And it hadn't brought about change. Well, it's
because you had this conjunction of three things. You had the crisis in the East German leadership.
They were fighting each other partly through internal power struggles and how they were going
to respond to Mikhail Gorbachev, the Soviet premiers, reforms of Glasnost and Perestroika.
You had the ideas lying around in terms of ideas around democratic freedoms, freedom of movement,
freedom of speech, partly spread by Watzlaw Havel in essays like The Power of the Powerless.
And then you had the disruptive movements taking to the streets, the big uprisings in Leipzig in
October 1989. And finally, the big shifts of the big mobilizations in Berlin in early November 1989,
which tipped the system. And so there's a kind of conjunction going on. And so the question,
let me just say one more point about this is that at a moment of crisis, a society can go in multiple
directions. So in the depression in the 1930s, you know, after the Wall Street crash, some countries
like Scandinavia responded to that crisis with social democracy, welfare states. In other places,
it accelerated the shift towards fascism, Italy, Germany. So here we are at a moment of crisis,
being expressed in riots in the UK right now, being expressed in the capital attack in 2021 with the
Proud Boys and QAnon, which direction are we going to go? We've got to be ready for the change.
So if people are interested in this concept of a disruption nexus and this triangle that you just
described, and if they believe that your speculation and framing there is onto something, given an unknown
timeline from one month to 10 years before the next mega crisis, what would we do now as individuals
or as community mayors and local leaders or nationally? Given what you've learned, what could you advise
people do now under that disruption nexus framework?
I think the historical message is very clear that you don't get the rapid transformative change unless we
act collectively in disruptive movements. That's the history of the
slave uprisings in Britain in the 1830s which accelerated the change towards the Abolition
of Slavery Act in 1833. That's the story of the suffragettes taking to the streets in Finland and
Britain in the early 19th century. That's the story of the civil rights movement in the US in the 1960s of
rule baking disruptive movements. I think that's the story of where we need to be today. On this very
podcast, I remember hearing Bill McKibben saying,
the best thing to do as an individual is to be less of an individual. I think that's a rough
quote, let's say. I think it's about collective action. It's about asking yourself, what can I do
with others to be part of this new story? You might act in very different ways. It doesn't mean you have
to be doing what me and my daughter have sometimes done, which is lie on the street in the front of the
houses of parliament and block the roads with Extinction Rebellion taking direct action on the
ecological crisis. I don't do that naturally. I like staying in old libraries in Oxford and writing
books. I found that the best way to be a good ancestor is to join those disruptive movements
as well as writing the books. That's not for everybody. For some people, it's saying,
let's join the parent-teacher association at the local school and get solar panels on the roof.
Let's be part of a collective reading circle. There's all sorts of things we can do, but I think
together, to we rather than me, is the way we're going to create change. It is too late to
leave the problems of our time to simmer on the low flame of gradualism, to quote Howard Zinn. It is
too late for that stuff. Of course, one other thing is we also need not just movements, but we need the
new ideas. We need the podcasts like this. We need the books. We need the films. We need to change the
ethnosphere so that we are ready. Is there anything that surprised you in your research?
Like, here's a book I'm going to write looking at the past to inform? Is there anything like,
whoa, I never would have expected that studying the past, either in a positive or a negative light?
Yeah. There were so many examples, but one of the ones that really struck me was that,
you know, people today, they're so often talking about the circular economy. How do we create a circular
economy where we're reusing, refurbishing materials and things like that? I'd always thought that,
well, yeah, past societies did that, but often on a really small scale, you know,
sort of indigenous cultures where, you know, they would live within the means of the resources that
they had with them. But one of the things I found was Japan in the 18th century, in the city of Edo,
today's Tokyo, that was a society with a million people living in it. So large scale. And they had
basically what we would today call a circular regenerative economy. So partly because of
resource scarcity, they weren't trading with the outside world. So they had scarcity of things like
cotton, timber. So if you had a kimono, you might wear it during the day. When it wore out, you would
turn it into pyjamas you'd wear at night, then you would chop it up and turn it into nappies for your
baby. After that, you turn it into cleaning cloths, and then you would burn it for fuel. There were
thousands of recycling and refurbishing, repurposing businesses in Edo in the 18th century. People
collecting used candle wax and reforming them into candles. Down and out samurai repairing umbrellas.
People would pay you for your human waste and sell it on as agricultural fertiliser. So
I look back at that and think, God, they had a kind of a no waste society back then and at scale.
And what a thing. Why didn't I know that? Why hadn't anybody told me about that? I love those
examples, which kind of surprised me. Well, and with a million people and not
that long ago, really. So it goes to show you how the benefits and the largesse from the carbon pulse
have blinded us to simple things like that. Things have been so cheap that we just, oh, this breaks,
I go buy a new one. And I think that's going to change in the not too distant future.
Can I say one other thing about Japan in the 18th century?
You may.
You know, just that, you know, people often say, oh,
environmentalists, you just want to go back and live in caves. Well, in 18th century Japan,
they weren't living in caves. This was a time of cultural flourishing, of the artworks of Hiroshigi
and the poetry of Basho, of Ikebana, you know, flower arranging and street theatre, sumo wrestling.
You know, I think that we can have cultural thriving within the boundaries of an ecological
civilization. I don't see that it's one or the other.
Do you take any like herbal supplements or anything? Because you have so many facts,
figures, names, dates on the tip of your tongue. I don't think my brain fires that way. How do you
manage that? Or is that just all your life you've been that way?
I know people who do it a lot more than me, but I think when you write a book like this,
it's just so fascinating to recognise that it doesn't have to be this way, the kind of world
that we have. These examples just kind of stick in my mind. In a way, I've been slowly educating
myself in the possibilities of a different kind of world. It's a little bit like that idea of shifting
baseline syndrome in ecology, you know, the way that the researchers take as their baseline their
kind of childhood levels of forest cover or fisheries, and then the baseline shifts up and
we forget what the abundance that there was in the past. That's what I think that history is like,
that there's this abundance of possibilities, and we need to break through the baseline of our
own imaginations. I've tried to fill my head in my latest book with these examples, and there are so
many others as well. I mean, one tiny example. We had a visitor to our home the other day, the great
native Hawaiian scholar, a guy called Kamana Bima, a brilliant thinker, a thinker about indigenous
knowledge in Hawaii. I was telling him about, hey, Kamana, did you know about Japan in the 18th
century? They had this incredible circular economy. He said, well, we had that in Hawaii too. Before 1810,
before the colonial period, we had what he calls the ancestral circular economy. Again, at scale,
Hawaiian islands, over a million people. I didn't write about that in my book. I wish I'd known about
it. In Maori culture, they say, I walk backwards into the future with my eyes fixed on the past.
Kia whakatomuri tahare whakamua. Let's do a little bit of that walking backwards.
In most of these cultures that you studied in the past, on average, had a fraction of the material
throughput that our modern culture does. This has been my point all along. That's why I call the podcast
The Great Simplification. Yes, I think our current civilization and the trappings and expectations
and footprints has an expiry date, but that doesn't mean that something wonderful still
can't come out the backside. We don't know what it's going to look like, but thank you for your
work in describing some of these things. Let's move on to some closing questions. You know what's coming
since you listen to the podcast, but in addition to becoming less of an individual, as you recommended,
echoing Bill McKibben's sentiments, what sort of personal advice to the viewers of this program
do you have who are aware of the meta crisis and all that it entails? Well, yes, I think there is the
aspect of acting collectively. I think I'd like to send a message of radical hope,
or draw a distinction between optimism and hope, rather. I think optimism is a kind of glass-half-full
attitude that everything's going to be okay. As I said at the beginning, I don't think everything's
going to be okay. We are heading down that curve towards civilizational breakdown. But I think always
remember to have hope, to act as if change were possible, because changes have happened in the past.
You know, nothing in history is inevitable until it happens. Take that thought with you in your
mental back pocket. What can someone listening to this episode right now do today, this week,
this month, to help address some of the broader challenges that we discussed and they're learning
about on this podcast? Or is it all up to politicians and leaders?
I think it's the opposite of that. I think politics is what happens in between elections.
It's how we reconstitute our communities, I think, that is going to be the bedrock of a different kind
of civilisation. It's that Asabiya point, once again. So think about what can you do in your neighbourhood
with other people in any field. It could be running a football team, a soccer team. It could be
setting up a conversation meal. It could be taking part in an ecological protest. Actually, it doesn't
matter because the great challenge we face as a society today, I think, is to shift from the 20th
century age of individualism to a 21st century age of more collective values. To shift from what I've
sometimes called introspection to outrospection. You know, the age of introspection we inherited from
neoliberal individualism, from Sigmund Freud and Oprah Winfrey, where we said to ourselves,
the way to answer the question of what should I do with my life is to look inside ourselves. Well,
introspection is about saying, the way I'm going to live my life is by discovering other people,
other cultures, stepping outside of who I am. Be an introspective adventurer.
I love that. How would you change your general advice for young humans? You used to teach college,
you have children. What do you say to a young 20-something listening to this show?
I would say, that's such a difficult question. What would I say to a young person? I mean,
I know what I say to my own young people. You know, I have kids, which is, I don't tell them too much,
in a way. I try not to ram my politics down their throat, and so I wouldn't like to do that
to a young person. But I would say to a young person to carry around with you a question.
You know, Steve Jobs gave this very famous, I think, Stanford address, college address, where he,
it was all about carpe diem, seizing the day. And he said, you know, ask yourself every day, you know,
if this was the last day of my life, what should I do with my life? And I think that's such a limited
way of thinking about the world. I would say ask yourself a different question, if you're a young
person, which is this. At the end of every day, ask yourself this question. What have I done today
to be a good ancestor? What have I done today to be remembered well by the generations to come?
I think the philosophy of being a good ancestor or a better ancestor is a pretty good one for driving
your life. I'm not telling you where you should stand, particularly in the political spectrum.
I'm not telling you who you should talk to, who you should not talk to. But think about your legacy,
how you be remembered, and what you want your grandchildren in 90 years time to say about who
you were and what you left to the world.
That's a good framing. What do you care most about in the world, Roman? And in your particular case,
among all my guests, you're the only one that the answer Kate Raworth would be acceptable.
What I care about most of the world? My thinking about what I care about has
changed so much over the last 20 or 30 years. In the 1990s, when I was involved in developing my,
I guess, intellectual apparatus, as it were, doing a PhD and becoming a university professor and all
this stuff, I look back at that time and think about how narrow my thinking was. The way it was
really narrow was the lack of recognition that we only have this one planet on which to survive and
thrive. All my fundamental thinking now is framed by that question of how do we create a world? You
know this, this is like bread and butter stuff to you, but it's new to me really in the last 10 years.
How do we create all our institutions, political, economic, social,
so that they are at least consistent with the idea of not using more resources than we can
naturally regenerate and not creating more waste than we can naturally be absorbed? How do we really
put that giant circle of the biosphere around all that we do so that it is so deep in us we don't
even have to think about it. It is literally like the air that we breathe. I know I'm not there yet.
I'm still on this journey because part of that journey requires something that I think your
podcast is so important for which is systems thinking. Getting us to think on the system
level to escape from the linearity of Steven Pinker-esque continuous progress kind of thinking.
We need to be thinking in terms of systems and without that we ain't getting anywhere.
If you could wave a magic wand and there was no personal recourse to your decision,
what's one thing you would do to improve human and planetary futures? Hypothetical example.
On that one, rather than talking big, let me just talk small or practical.
Over the last year or so, I've become really
interested in the idea of steward-ownership companies. Companies which are not necessarily
cooperatives but they're owned basically by a trust which has a fiduciary duty to look after the
planet or to care about a community. You've got companies like Patagonia, which basically they now
say, the earth is our one shareholder. They basically become a steward-owned company. Mozilla,
the people who own Firefox, that's a steward-owned company. Lots of examples of this.
If I could wave my magic wand, I would turn every FTSE 100, every Fortune 500 company
immediately from a shareholder-driven company into a steward-owned company. That's never going to happen
because, in fact, we need to grow those companies. Shell, Exxon, Mobil, whatever. They're never going
to go down that route. We need to grow those new companies. That's why I need the magic wand to turn
those ones into the kinds of companies that can help us negotiate a bend rather than a break.
David Well, that's why I asked the question. Your answer acts as an Overton window in a directionally
desirable way. Then you never know what the individuals collectively listening to this show
come up with. I think that's a really novel idea. Clearly, we just scratched the surface of your work
here today, Roman. If you were to come back and do a follow-up conversation on any topic, something that
may be in one of your books or not, that you're really passionate about and you think is relevant
to our future, what is one topic that you would like to take a deep dive on?
Adam Oh, that is such a good question. The one that pops into my head is that concept I mentioned
earlier, which is the idea of temporal intelligence. One might call it temporal wisdom. My son thinks I
should call it temporal wisdom, not temporal intelligence. He thinks I'm too analytic. He's
only 15. He's wise for 15.
David Yeah. I think this is something that I see very much in your work,
the importance of taking a different time perspective. We've partly talked about that,
but I think we could take that conversation in many other directions. How do we cognitively and
culturally rethink that fourth dimension of time? Because I think if we are not able to do that,
we are missing something that humans are good at, the temporal pirouette. We are good at dancing
across time, but our institutions don't match that capacity. It is hugely underdeveloped. How are we going
to do it? How does it link to the kind of issues that you're thinking about? How we reconstitute
ourselves as we wean ourselves off the carbon pulse and shift to new energy systems? How can time be part
of creating a new post-material culture, as well as a post-carbon culture? All of these issues. Time,
I think, is something that we need to learn to play with and dance with and think about.
I agree. It's a great topic. Thank you so much, Roman. This is our first conversation and I
expect to not our last. I appreciate all your work on being a good ancestor and passing that baton to
other humans. Thank you very much, Nate. Look, there's so much that I wanted to ask you as well. I
only asked you a couple of questions, but I have so many more written down on my little piece of paper
here. Let us continue the journey sooner rather than later. Thank you very much.
To be continued, my friend.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please follow us on your favorite podcast platform. You can also visit thegreatsimplification.com
for references and show notes from today's conversation. To connect with fellow listeners of
this podcast, check out our Discord channel. This show is hosted by me, Nate Higgins, edited by No
Troublemakers Media, and produced by Misty Stinnett, Leslie Batlutz, Brady Hyen, and Lizzie Sirianni.
