Hey there, folks, welcome to today's episode of the Strategy and Leadership Podcast.
My guest today, Toby Southgate, who is the global CEO at Foschmann and Bodenfosch,
and hopefully I got it with my singing words there,
former chief growth officer at McCann World Group,
part of an organization that's been around a long time, global organization.
Toby, just excited to have you here, and thanks for listening to the podcast
and being ready to give it everything you got today.
So thanks for being here.
That's my pleasure. Thank you very much for having me, Anthony.
And great job, by the way, on the pronunciation.
Took me a little longer to get it that close, so well done.
I got a good teacher, so thank you for that.
So why don't you tell our listeners a little bit about you personally,
a little bit about the organization that I can't promise I will be able to get as perfect the next time,
and we'll get into some questions.
Sure, no problem.
Foschmann and Bodenfosch first.
This has been the last three years or so of my life,
but Foschmann and Bodenfosch is a global creative collective,
an agency, as some people might describe it,
born in Sweden 37 or so years ago.
Now global, we've got about 450 people across New York, Toronto, Dublin, London, England,
where I'm speaking to you from today, two offices in Sweden, Gothenburg, where we were born,
and Stockholm, where we, I guess, where we had some children or we sent some children to build a business there,
and Singapore and Shanghai.
So in our world of creative agencies,
you know, we have a couple of fairly,
not unique, but fairly special points of differentiation.
One being that we are truly global,
but kind of more boutique-y in scale.
And secondly, that we were born, as I said, in Sweden,
and still operate the agency in ways that reflect the founding principles.
You know, we use the word collective to describe how we expect our people to behave,
as well as how we're organized.
We've grown up, you know, very much in a sort of bottom-up leadership environment.
It was made very clear to me when I was coming into the business that,
you know, if we have an organizational pyramid,
then Forshman and Bowdoin Falls is inverted.
It's an upside-down triangle, not the, you know, the classic hierarchical one.
And my job was at the bottom.
You know, my job is to make everybody else better.
So there was lots about that that appealed to me,
based on things I'd done in the past,
as well as, you know, this is a creative business
with a kind of disproportionate reputation to its scale.
You know, it's done some staggeringly successful work over time
for clients like Volvo and Visit Sweden and H&M and SK2,
which is a P&G skincare brand, highly regarded
and with a reputation in the creative industries
that we work pretty hard to protect.
You know, it's a special place.
And I'd wanted, you know, I'd wanted to be in a conversation with them
for a little while before it came up.
And then when I had the opportunity to learn more personally
about this little place that I'd heard a lot about from the outside
and whose work I'd admired for a really long time,
you know, it was just increasingly attractive.
And the interview process, while hellish, was absolutely worth it in the end.
And then sort of working backwards, me, I guess, yeah,
if I work backwards chronologically before joining Forshman and Bodenforce,
which is also part of a holding group,
whose mission is to transform marketing,
Stagwell's mission to transform marketing,
which is a kind of new era marketing services holding company.
That story also was a sort of big driver of appeal for me.
But I'd been in other marketing services holding companies
and really sort of just, I guess,
three career chapters of reasonable success
and a couple of epic failure that came at the beginning.
But sort of in reverse chronological order,
before Forshman and Stagwell,
I spent four years or so at McCann World Group,
as you said, as chief growth officer in the global group in New York,
working around and alongside some brilliant people
who'd taken McCann Network on a real journey.
As someone else, I think, who's appeared on this podcast has said,
you know, from like the worst big creative network to the best.
And I was by no means, you know, in charge of that journey.
But I was a contributor to a part of it.
And it was a brilliant learning experience.
For 10 years before that, or almost 10 years before that,
I worked inside WPP,
which was run or built and run at the time by Sir Martin Sorrell,
probably one of the biggest personalities
and biggest influences over the whole marketing industry
over the last few decades.
It was a brilliant experience too,
working in just one agency actually inside WPP,
but all over the world.
I started in the Middle East.
I moved to the US and spent some time there with the business,
then back to London, then back to the US, then back to London.
So bouncing around a little bit.
And then before, though, that's sort of 14, 15 years
in the big holding companies or the big creatively led networks.
I did a couple of stints of three years or so each in independent agencies,
one very design and strategy led,
the other one very much driven around corporate brand strategy,
brand purpose, brand vision,
how you get an organization pulling in the same direction
in terms of connecting business strategy to marketing strategy.
And those were all those sort of sequential journeys, I guess.
The two epic failures, one when I,
my sort of dream and ambition when I was a kid
was to play professional sports, specifically cricket.
And I believed I could do that until I was,
well, probably it lasted,
the belief lasted way longer than the potential, I think.
But I really wanted,
I really wanted to be a professional cricket player.
I think, I think you got the, the right, the right career.
Sounds like you ended up in the right career for you.
Maybe. Yeah, maybe, maybe.
I mean, now you're 20 years in or whatever.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
So two failures like sports and banking,
but I'm, I'm probably glad of the failures. Right.
And I've certainly enjoyed everything that happened since,
even though honestly, a bit of an accident.
Well, you know, if I were to bet there's probably more than two,
and that's why you've become so successful,
but chiefly in, in those two.
So let me ask you, of course, you know,
I want to ask you questions about people.
I want to ask you about, you know, aligning creatives,
fundamentally the difference between the network of, you know,
creatives versus a collective of creatives and we'll get there.
But the thing I really want to start with,
because we start with softball questions here is,
is how do you personally communicate the value of creative?
Because, you know, as,
as we work with so many organizations around the world,
as you know, and different organizations,
and if you haven't grown around advertising media,
this kind of like value-based kind of tool is kind of hard to quantify.
You're like, Hey, I just need,
like I need marketing versus creative,
or I need something that is,
I need a brand versus something that connects with my audience and stirs
emotion.
So, you know, of course you're representing, you know,
the organization, but personally,
how do you view the value of creative?
How do you view positioning the importance of creative and how do you
communicate the importance of what you do?
And if you can do that in three minutes or less, that'd be great.
Well, you touch on something there that I think our industry is really good at,
which is making up words to describe things that can be unclear,
but should probably be much more easily defined or much more easily,
easily codified.
And I think, I think honestly,
we also invent things sometimes across the marketing world to justify what it is
that we do,
because we can't always explain the core impact of an individual strand of work,
which is essentially the problem.
And therefore for my answer to the question,
I actually always start with understanding what our clients believe the value of
creativity is and how they define creativity,
because if their answer is advertising or a piece of packaging or a logo design,
we need to work harder to understand that actually there's something bigger and
broader at stake.
And, and my, my view on this,
which has sort of firmed up and been influenced by a lot of people is that
really creativity at its core is about solving problems,
solving problems for businesses,
solving problems for the world and societies and culture around us.
What can we do to influence the big themes that our clients,
businesses are facing?
And if that's the discussion that clients want to have,
like how do we find an interesting, innovative, unusual,
unexpected answer to that problem,
then actually whether we're using a piece of communication design,
a piece of an advertising campaign,
whether we're using a naming architecture system for a suite of products,
whether we're using packaging design or a more innovative spend or allocation
of a media budget, you know,
those things matter far less than defining the problem up front.
And I think a lot of folks,
it's too easy in an industry that's evolved so much over the last 10 plus years,
the rise of digital,
to think about marketing as a cost.
And we've got to remember that it should be an investment, right?
Marketing period is about helping businesses and brands grow.
And if we sit in our individual silos,
looking at the immediate requirements around us,
it's too easy to fall into defending a cost rather than supporting an investment.
We always want to be supporting the investment and understanding the bigger goals
behind a client's brief and their business challenges.
Yeah.
So what I hear ultimately it's,
you know,
the clients are facing some sort of challenge and then you are solving it through,
you know,
dare I say,
well,
you're solving it through creative,
which is fundamentally creative solutions within the kind of sphere bundle of marketing.
You know,
when we talk to,
or transforming marketing effectively,
because that's the mission.
When we talk to folks about like what their mission and purpose is,
the amount of times people default to say solutions.
And going back to that,
naming something that is hard to be named,
solutions doesn't actually tell you what it does.
And so for me,
I ban it.
I just say,
you can't use the word solutions,
whatever it is,
because that doesn't actually say what you really do.
What is the outcome?
What is the,
you know,
what are the value for them that they get?
And what I heard the value out of creative in this case,
and creative from your agency and collective is,
is really like being able to kind of like wiggle through that,
like place to connect to your customer,
to like bring them to you.
Cause at the end of the day,
that's,
that's why you do it.
What would you say to let's say a CEO or an organizational leader who is
trying to decide if they need marketing and branding or creative,
and then kind of said another way in your experience,
what have you seen be the differentiator between,
you know,
I'll call it the best customers or the best partnerships,
the ones that really see,
Hey,
creative is the way that I want to go versus potentially a customer or,
or partner that wasn't a fit because they're saying,
Hey,
I just need,
I just need this level.
Whereas I really need something.
Yeah.
Pencendent or,
you know,
you get what I mean by the question.
Yeah,
I do.
It's a,
it's a great question.
It's a good analysis of some of the challenges of,
of this industry actually at the moment.
And I think if I,
you know,
one of the things that really appealed to me when I started talking to,
to the team that runs Stagwell,
you know,
Mark Penn,
who put it together,
Jay Leviton,
who sits to the right hand,
our global president,
you know,
that we had good conversations about the kind of dream.
What does a dream client look like?
What's the best work you've done with your clients in the past?
And it actually all came from a kind of common definition of what the
problem was and the comfort with taking uncomfortable conversations.
And,
and I think it was,
it was probably Mark who said something like that.
That was how he built his businesses in the past.
He wants to be the guy who clients phone when they have a problem that
they don't know how to solve and be comfortable enough in the relationship to
sit around the table and define what the problem really is and work a way
through it and do that in an agnostic way,
without trying to sell the services that your specific agency or capability might,
might lead you to want to recommend.
And so that that's,
that's been my experience.
And Mark probably summed it up more neatly than,
than I would have done before I'd had that conversation with him,
but it was always being on the end of a tricky and,
you know,
opaque conversation in some ways,
I've got this problem.
How do we solve it and a willingness to work through it together that define
great relationships or great partnerships.
The ones that,
that sort of start in a,
in a pretty tactical place,
a very prescriptive place,
you know,
I I've,
I've got this idea or we we're running this campaign.
It's not quite doing X,
Y,
Z for us with demographic ABC in market and OP.
So what we really need to do is tune it and replicate it in
that market to achieve these goals.
And that's a really tactical single channel,
single discipline request that some businesses are really set up to deliver
against.
It was a great relief to understand that Forshman and Bodenforce is not set up
to deliver on that brief,
that it is set up to have that sort of big meaty initial discussion and work
through a plan together.
Even if it means that actually what we really need to do is connect you
client partner with with a PR agency with with a research business.
That's going to help you really get under the skin of what you think this
problem is,
but it might not be that.
And,
and those things,
you know,
again,
very agnostic,
very collaborative by nature.
That's again,
a sort of founding founding principle of,
of a business that,
you know,
I think the way we work could only have been created in,
in Sweden or perhaps other parts of the Nordics too.
But,
you know,
speaking about,
about how we do things,
radical collaboration is a big part of that.
That means giving things away sometimes and not over claiming your ability to
solve the problem with a piece of,
you know,
let's call it creative output for,
for Forsman and Bodenforce creativity is the approach.
It's not the output that the approach to solving the problem.
And you,
you said squiggly or wiggly or something,
you know,
amazingly.
And we didn't talk about this in advance.
I can assure all your listeners of this,
but we call all our strategic process,
the squiggle process.
That's how we talk about it because it isn't linear.
It doesn't have three steps or five steps or seven P's or whatever the hell you want to use.
It,
it recognizes that it's human and flawed and you're going to go around in circles a bit.
And that's okay,
because that's how you often get to that.
Some of the best and most unexpected answers.
And that,
that squiggle,
you know,
that squiggle means a lot to us.
We use it in our,
it's part of our visual language.
I,
I have it tattooed on my arm.
Like this little squiggly thing here is part of our process.
And so when, when clients ask us that,
so great creativity ideas,
I get it.
You know,
I think we do need an unusual problem.
How are we going to get there?
You know,
I've been in places before when,
when, you know,
the answer is the working process.
And,
and the truth is that the working process is just easier to sell.
Sometimes it doesn't mean it's the way of getting to the right solution.
And then,
and I'm using that word purposefully because you,
you ban it,
you know,
it's like,
get it because you're trying to,
you're trying to stop people from using woolly language and,
and,
and this world is unfortunately full of woolly language.
So,
you know,
one of my questions that I alluded to earlier and,
and highlighted that I would ask you is,
you know,
how do you,
how do you lead creatives?
You know,
like I,
well,
from what I hear about your process,
the squiggly process is fundamentally the folks coming into the door.
They need to be ready to solve problems.
They do it through their set of tools,
which happens to be creative,
you know,
language,
you know,
motive,
that kind of stuff.
So it's,
it's kind of a two part question,
I guess.
And I'm forming it as I go.
One is how,
how do you align those folks and to solve a problem and be,
how do you,
how do you get a group of people to solve a problem?
And I'll kind of translate it to our kind of typical audience who
typically let's call it senior managers,
middle managers.
They're leading their teams.
They want to drive something.
They want to drive culture.
They want to drive revenue sales.
They want to have process in people following their process.
And they're sitting here,
they're in their offices and they're like,
well,
fundamentally I know what I want.
I know the end state.
I don't necessarily know where I'm at.
I don't even know where to start.
And from our perspective,
it's,
hey,
have a conversation about something.
So how do you lead your team at a macro level to drive forward those
outcomes at scale?
And then how do you lead them at a micro outcome when there is a big,
hairy squiggly problem that you have to somehow come up with a solution
for,
for which the language of the problem or the language of the solution might
not exist.
And I'll give you more than three minutes on that one.
Well,
it's a two parter, right?
So I can only get six minutes.
I don't know.
I don't have a,
I don't have a timer up.
So,
so feel free to interject at any point.
I think the,
I mean,
I I've seen what I consider to be good and bad examples of leadership inside
creatively led businesses.
And,
and,
and the things that I've,
you know,
again,
part of the appeal of Forshman and Bowdoin force was that the things that I'd always found
appealing,
though difficult to articulate or synthesize for myself,
I really found in,
in this place.
place.
And those things would be probably,
probably three,
probably three key learnings.
Right.
And I'll,
and I'll try and attribute each of them to,
to people or places.
The first,
and it took me going to McCann World Group to hear this explained so,
so clearly.
And by,
by so many senior leaders.
So,
with such consistency.
Right.
And it was the real constant affirmation of the importance of why the agency exists,
that the agency's purpose in the world.
And at McCann,
they had this incredible 120 year old story or something called truth well told.
And by finding what they call,
and I believe still call a brand's meaningful role,
the,
the meaningful role a brand will play in people's lives.
You're able to get very quickly to a,
a smart answer to a creative challenge.
And they'd done an incredible job.
Of aligning this organization of 20,000 people.
Behind that,
that commitment.
And,
and it was in every presentation.
It was the first slide of every client meeting,
every internal deck,
like everybody knew.
And that's very powerful.
So,
Fortune and Bodenforce had some similarly.
Codified assets,
but the importance of those assets is,
is critical.
Why are we all here?
Everyone in the organization has to be able to answer that.
Second is that.
Most great work.
No matter how complex the problem.
No matter how big the task or the output.
No matter how long it lasts.
Is genuinely done by small groups of people.
Right?
You know,
and,
and,
and no,
you know,
no one.
Amazon has something like this,
you know,
Jeff Bezos is to pizza rule or whatever it is.
You know,
the prep that goes into Amazon meetings.
So when you come in,
you're all on the same page,
all that stuff.
You know,
I,
I think,
I think the same,
you know,
I've,
I've seen and learned that actually,
the more people you have trying to solve a problem,
especially if there's a number of people involved for,
either hierarchical or structural reasons,
the longer you're going to take to get to a great answer.
And,
and that's something that bigger groups tend to get bogged down by.
You know,
I've been in briefings where our agencies brought three or four people
and other agencies brought 30.
And there are maybe five clients.
And I know if that happens,
that we stand a really good job of differentiating ourselves and engaging
more quickly and getting to a better answer faster.
And,
and I think that the size and scale of teams is another defining aspect of,
of sort of great,
great leadership in creative companies.
And then the third is,
but it's sort of a tough balance.
It's like teams need empowered.
They need to be given space,
time,
and they also need to be accountable.
Like you can't send three people off into the wilderness,
for a few weeks and hope that they come back with a great answer.
You know,
and actually I think guidance,
accountability and understanding that you,
you can have the space and the time,
and then we need to get very quickly to some well-defined results or outputs.
And,
and those,
those things for me sort of tend to tie it together,
right?
Clarity of why we're here,
small teams able to get quickly to answers and giving those teams enough space
and also clear accountability,
which often is something that creatively led businesses can,
can lack,
right?
They're really good with the space.
And they either get too harsh with the accountability.
You've got 7.5 hours today to get these three things done.
Or we've only been paid for three days on this client.
So we've got to get the answer out quickly like that.
That doesn't work.
That's too prescriptive.
And it doesn't allow for the messy squiggle,
the human element,
which actually,
you know,
that's,
that's a,
that's the defining at the moment,
the defining power of,
of certainly enforcement and Bowdoin forces global footprint is the kind of
density of talent in that group.
You know,
it's only 450 people,
but it's properly global and all 450 of these people are pretty damn good.
There's nowhere really to hide because we,
we give the empowerment and we also clear with the accountability.
Yeah.
And I think that's critical,
like setting the expectations of and setting the culture such that yes,
you have freedom and space,
but it's also,
I'm going to use the word intense.
It's not one that you use,
but to say like,
Hey, we demand a lot,
but we give a lot.
And for some folks,
that's not the right environment.
Some people would be like,
well,
I need how much time should I spend on this 7.5 hours?
Okay, great.
I need that direction.
And then I find at least in the creative problems that I solve,
that they are solved when you're not working on them,
whether that's in the shower,
whether that's driving,
whether that that's doing whatever.
And so finding that like balance,
but I also caution you as the listener,
if your CEO says,
I'm going to go off into the woods for three days,
and I'm going to come back with our strategy,
like run.
And I have a very personal experience with that.
So sorry to those of you that have been affected by that.
That wasn't me, by the way,
I'm not the in the woods CEO,
but you know,
I I've seen it very recently and it didn't go well.
So anyway point of that is I love the framework.
I love, you know,
small teams being able to solve a problem.
I love being able to support them in being successful
while also holding them big and then allowing them to do that.
And then, you know, that's where it's the blank space.
It's the Jeremy bear me for those of you that might understand that reference,
that it's, you know, sometimes always sometimes never,
and maybe on a Tuesday.
That's a good place kind of thing anyway.
Okay.
Last question that I want to ask you.
Not including your cricket career.
What advice would you give to someone who is interested
in the creative industry,
who wants to both cut their teeth, but do meaningful work?
And within the context of, you know,
this is recorded in 2024, you've been in the industry 15 years and,
you know, the red ocean, blue ocean, it's,
it's evolved greatly across the world looking 15 years ahead.
You know, what kind of guiding principles,
what would you encourage potential creatives to think about as they enter this career?
And then you can kind of expand that out broadly to leadership, should you wish.
Okay.
I mean, there's never been a better description of the kinds of people
that I think will always thrive in, say, the creative industries generally,
but certainly in the creative elements of marketing and communications,
and then the phrase that WPP used to use.
And I think that John Steele, the guy who was the global head of planning for WPP for a while,
one of the most famous is advertising and comms planning brains ever.
And he created, or was part of the team that created for WPP,
the fellowship program, which was sadly, sadly, I don't think it exists anymore,
but it was essentially a place where talented young people could, could,
could go to learn how the industry worked.
And they did a three year rotation around three different disciplines
inside the group and, and three markets, I think as well at one point.
And John's description of the kind of people that he was looking for were ambidextrous brains.
You know, people with a little bit of left and a little bit of right,
a little bit of analysis, a little bit of creativity.
And, and I think that's something that isn't teased out or taught enough in, in schools.
Like I, I fell into this industry. I had no idea about what marketing was or what creative agencies
did, or, or that you could be in advertising if you weren't an artist or a writer.
I didn't, I didn't know, um, I wasn't taught it.
I didn't study subjects that led me in this direction, but I, but I wish I had, you know,
I really wish that I was talking to you now with 25 years experience, not 15 or 18 or whatever it is,
because I would have found it earlier. And I think I wouldn't have been able to define it as,
you know, I sort of wouldn't have been able to define or claim that I believed I had an ambidextrous
brain. Um, but I've seen, I've seen, and would stand by the fact that, that there are a group
of people in a certain, you know, approach to life. If you don't quite know which way you lean,
the marketing and creativity is a great place to go. And, and I think that, that you find that out by
putting yourself in the position where you, you get uncomfortable quickly and see how you work
through it. And you can do that anywhere, right? You know, what's the right way to solve a problem
that applies when I'm putting my shoes on in the morning, um, or driving my car to the garage,
cause something's gone wrong with it again, or talking to my kids about why I need them to eat
their vegetables, not only the, the, the beige stuff on their plate, but these are all acts of solving
problems. And, and I think that there's talent in that regard in, in everyone, if they choose to tap
into it. So find it if you can. And that, that description of ambidextrous brains, I think is,
is never going to change. Um, and then I think throwing that forward, you said sort of 15 years out,
you know, uh, you know, 50, 15 years ago, you know, the mobile internet on a, on a smartphone didn't
exist, barely existed. Um, and of course everybody in my world right now is talking about, you know,
what is AI going to do to all our jobs? Well, it's going to change a lot of them. Um, but I don't
think it will ever change the need for that ambidextrous human brain to scope an idea, to frame
a challenge, to add human context because, uh, you know, brands exist and companies market to a human
world. Um, even in, you know, I'm using air quotes, even in B2B marketing, you know, it's human beings
that make the decisions, right? You know, an institution does not make a decision on which
software platform to invest its next three years of capex in, you know, people within that institution
make the decision. So there's a human element, um, that I believe is how work is made, how ideas are
created, generated, executed, um, and sometimes even where, where and how they appear in the world
will, will change radically in the next 15 years and the way it has in the last 15 years.
But those ambidextrous brains, um, I believe will always be in demand.
I love that. I couldn't agree more. Uh, Toby, where can people connect with you? Where can they
learn more about the work that you're doing? And if they're going to Google, it's spelt in English,
like Forsman, voted for it. Yeah. Well, luckily, luckily for anyone wanting to find us,
Forsman.com, uh, F-O-R-S-M-A-N.com, um, is, uh, is our global website, all our work, all our history,
some of our stories are there, even a picture of my squiggle process tattoo, I think. Um, I'm easy to
find, uh, LinkedIn, Toby Southgate, Forsman, Bodefors, um, you'll find me anywhere you need me to,
to be. Um, but yeah, it's, uh, it's good to talk to you, Anthony. I, I, I love talking about this
world. I'm passionate about it. Um, and I wish more people, more people would, would, uh, would
pick up the phone and, and have a chat about, about what makes, what makes leadership easier.
Uh, some of the challenges we face that they're often common. Um, and it's great to, uh, to be part
of your, your show. I appreciate it. Well, that sounds like that's an invitation to give you a ring,
um, to talk about big problems, but Toby Southgate, thank you for being here today. It's been a pleasure
and, and given us lots to, to think about, not only about, uh, you know, the lessons learned
in our past, um, but what skills and attributes are needed in the future. So thanks for being here
on the show. Really? My pleasure. Folks, my guest today is Toby Southgate from Forsman, Bodefors.
Um, you know, one of the things I'm taking away from today is, you know, of course, the idea of solving
problems, but, you know, we talked about solving problems at the beginning and tied it through at the
end. What do you need? You need a good team. You need space. You need creativity,
but you also need the skill. And what does that skill mean? You know, if you're programmed to only
look at things, every, if you are a hammer, everything you see is a nail that probably
doesn't work for the future. Cause the nail now is going to look different than the nail in the
future. So maybe you need to be a multi-tool and Toby, if you don't mind me saying, so you're like,
Hey, I wish I was in the industry sooner. I bet that's the thing that makes you fricking awesome.
I almost dropped an F bomb, but I can't, it's my show. That's the thing that makes you great
because you didn't just go into it. You got to have, you know, that experience that truly made
you the person that you are, which makes you the great creative and leader that you are.
And so for folks here, if you think your journey is windy, it's probably supposed to be. So really,
like embrace the journey, embrace what you're working up. And, um, my favorite quote, personal
quote, it's how I live. And I will end the show with this. And it's a tool quote and it's ride the
spiral to the end. You may just go where no one's been. And so I encourage you to just ride the
spiral today and, uh, something great could happen. So thanks for being here. Thanks for
watching. Thanks for subscribing. Um, if you want to help us get the show in the hands of
more people, give us a review, just let us know what you thought of this episode. It helps us,
you know, expand that. Um, so Toby can have more people calling him, asking him about leadership.
So once again, my name is Anthony Taylor. This has been the strategy and leadership podcast.
I appreciate you. I'll see you next time.
