Today we are going to talk about a very interesting model which helps us understand
small-scale fisheries in the German North Sea. First you know can I ask you to tell
us a bit about yourself and you know how you got involved with this modeling project.
Sure. Hi, my name is Karsten. Karsten Lemmen. I am an outside senior researcher now with
the Helmholtz Center Herion in Germany. That's a research facility, a large infrastructure
research facility just outside of Hamburg. And the last project where I was involved
in was called MUSL, Multiple Stressors on North Sea Life. It ran for three years, was
funded by the German Research Ministry. Thank you very much. So let's start at the beginning.
Why was this model created? And I mean, can you tell us about the purpose behind this model?
Now we do have already advanced models for ecosystems in the North Sea. So we are quite confident
modeling algae, zooplankton, not so confident doing that with jellies and fish yet. But
we have never before connected those ecosystem models with socio-ecological models of the fisheries.
So the purpose is to represent the fishers in that very narrow economic sector of small-scale
sea German fisheries in its environmental context. And by doing so, by having that representation,
we aim to a provide the modeling platform as a tool for better and structured dialogue with
stakeholders, with fishers, with agencies along the coast. That's also the reason why we do
that on a NetLogo platform. And the second reason is, of course, to explore scenarios with the model,
and also in the dialogue with stakeholders, on how the system could evolve given other pressures,
areas like the removal of the resource, the closure of areas, the interference with shipping, with offshore wind farming.
This sea area that we looked at is one of the most heavily trafficked ones in the world.
So what were the biggest challenges you faced when developing this model?
Some of the challenges that we had did not have to do so much with the modeling process itself. We spoke to lots of experts on fisheries, so we think we're quite confident that we have a good view of what the agent does and how she or he thinks and decides.
We have lots of data available on the North Sea system. Of course, there could always be more data,
but I think sufficient for this purpose. We rely on many, I think 20 or so, I listed them all in the model repository,
open data sources to describe the environment. It's a lot of work to put all of that together, but it's not a major, major challenge, I'd say.
So, yeah, I guess that was just, it was good. It was not a very difficult thing to do. But of course, what we have now has become quite complex after three years of development.
So now let's talk about the outcomes of this work. What are the key insights or findings from analyzing this model?
Well, the key purpose that the model was built on was to look at, to explore scenarios of mostly area closures that occur here in the water and sea. If you look at the map behind me,
that's kind of the coast, and you see all the colored dots, that's where the fishers, well, in that snapshot of the model, were actively fishing.
And much of that area that you see now is being fished is reserved offshore for offshore wind farming in the future, so they won't be able to go there.
And much of the area that you see close to the coast, so gray is coast, blue is sea.
Much of that area is National Park area, where the shrimp fisheries is still exempted from any bans. So they actually fish in a protected area.
And it is under discussion in the European Union that in all marine protected areas like the water and sea area here, the fisheries should be entirely banned or banned at least 30% of the area.
And we wanted to look at mitigation strategies that those fishers have to deal with those closures of their traditional fishing grounds.
And usually that always means to spend more money, because if you go somewhere else, you probably go somewhere that's a little bit further away.
You spend more time at sea, you spend more diesel, you have to burn more diesel.
And that's it gets a little bit more expensive.
We have also seen that, of course, you know, fuel prices have been drastically changing in the past and they make up about 20% of the entire cost.
So maybe it's it's not critical, but it's one of those factors that will make probably more expensive and that these fisher women and men have to deal with to balance their cost.
The emergent pattern that we observe and that we wanted to observe in the model is, of course, the change of the fish area.
Now we have about 200 shrimp fishers and about 100 fishers that go for place and soil.
So flat fish on the ground.
We concentrate here on shrimp.
So then near coastal fisheries.
And we observe in our current scenario simulations how those the pattern of the used fishing area shifts.
Of course, if you close it near shore, it will move more offshore.
We also look at the economic balance for the fishers in those cases.
So you have archived your model on comces.net and I believe sharing your work with the scientific community is a very big step.
So what were some of the challenges in this process?
I mean, are there any challenges in the process of archiving your model?
From the beginning of the project, we all had agreed among the project consortium that all the data we were using,
no, we were producing and all the models would be open source and open data.
Actually, that was very difficult.
If you deal with an economically sensitive sector like fisheries, there are only about 200 boats here, shrimpers, from maybe 100 something different operators.
As soon as you have access to economic data and to location data that is sensitive data.
That data per se is not allowed to be published.
So I think that was the largest challenge that we had here.
So what we did is lots of discussions with people who own the data.
But then to come up with the idea that we had to aggregate the data, obtain the statistical properties of the data,
and then produce a surrogate data set of the boats that we can use in our model.
What helped immensely was that not only the project partners had agreed,
but that also I'm a teacher of ecosystem modeling at Lofana University.
I teach ecosystem modeling.
I use NetLogo agent-based models with my students.
I encourage my students to put their models up on commsysnet.
And I've had a long knowledge of the platform commsys.
That is just my own expertise that I brought in here.
So for me, to do this all open source was agreed before.
But to put it especially on commsysnet, that was my own effort.
And because I like the platform, I think for environmental models,
for me, it's the go-to platform.
It's rich in very short, small models that are good for education that I use in my teaching.
So even though this is a larger effort and research model,
I think it fit well into the commsys suite of.
So what's next for this model?
Are there any follow-up studies or developments planned?
The project has ended.
The funding for the project has ended.
But my institute agreed to continue to fund me
or to allow me as part of my institutional funding
to continue using this model and applying it.
And my personal major goal for maybe version 2
is to make it a real participatory model.
So I'm now looking, and there's already a branch, a feature branch on the repository,
looking into a HubNet activity where we could actually have, well,
a part of the 200 boats or single ones, I don't know yet, yeah,
operated or the decisions would be made by a participant in the room
or in an online community.
Thank you.
Thank you so much for sharing your work and insights with us today.
Well, thank you for inquiring in your interest about our model.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
