Catherine Lu, a professor of film and media studies at the University of California, Irvine,
in her book Virtue Hoarders, the case against the professional managerial class, argues that
the professional managerial class is engaged in a class war, not against capitalists or capitalism,
but against the working classes. This professional class, the bulwark of the liberal class and the
Democratic Party, demonizes a working class that fails, in its eyes, to behave properly. It abrogates
to itself the right to determine who is socially acceptable according to their secularized virtue
and who is not. It reworks political struggles for policy change and redistribution, she writes,
into individual passion plays, focusing its efforts on individual acts of giving back
or reified forms of self-transformation. Its politics has reduced virtue signaling. It engenders moral
panics to incite its members to ever more pointless forms of pseudo-politics and hyper-vigilance. It
seeks, she writes, to play the virtuous social hero, but as a class, it is hopelessly reactionary.
Joining me to discuss her book, Virtue Hoarders, is Professor Catherine Liu. I love the book. I can't
believe you're an academic. It was so well written. Thank you, and I know what you mean. I believe in
the craft of writing, unlike most of my colleagues. That is so true. They don't even make an effort,
you know. It's not hard to write clearly and succinctly. Yeah, I mean, this just got played
out in the whole election, I think. I mean, we just saw everything you've written in this book on display.
But let's talk about this professional managerial class and how it differs from the old class of the
robber barons and the capitalists, the Carnegies, the Rockefellers, the Melons, because there is a
difference. What is the difference? Well, in the era when those big money bags were making their money,
there were actual members of my class, academics, who were on the side of the workers. Edward A. Ross,
who founded the sociology department at UW-Madison. He was fired by Leland Stanford Jr.'s widow from
Stanford University, very much on the side of the working class. John Dewey was another man who was
fighting against the capitalist hyperaccumulation at the time and hoping for a kind of public liberal
education that would raise up American citizens to be full participants in what he called industrial
democracy. Today, our the professoriate or the credentialed elites from the members of the medical
profession to the members of the bar serve the interests of capital and in my very directly by,
you know, a shilling for big pharma or defending the rights of private equity on the part of lawyers.
But in my profession, like in the liberal humanities or academia writ large, you have these nonprofit
organizations which were founded by the Melons, by the Rockefellers, by the Fords because of their
enormous accumulation of wealth. And these foundations direct the politics of the professional managerial
class. And so you have from the nonprofit to from the nonprofit world, to the media world,
to the publishing world, it's completely captured by liberal Democrats who are now in total disarray
because the majority of Americans have rejected them. And they thought they could lead like the stupid
people out of their state of iniquity and ignorance into these hyper specialized, hyper individualized,
I would say like cultural vanguards that would totally obviate the need for actual policy that
would protect American lives, give American workers dignity, produce a kind of polity that encouraged
debate, dissent, skepticism, all those high liberal values that I think the kinds of authoritarian,
the authoritarian turn that we've seen in the liberal class has shown itself to be and has been rejected.
Like in the times as I wrote that book, the liberals have become more authoritarian. They've become more
repressive dissent. They think the attitude of skepticism about their positions is fascist, is racist.
Like, let's just say the whole problem of a technocratic managerial approach to inequality that they imposed on us
through diversity, equity and inclusion in the universities was something that we could debate. No, if you debate it,
you are racist. And they did that to supporters of Bernie Sanders. I still have these hyper democratic friends of
mine who are texting me from God knows where saying, you and the Bernie bros, if you hadn't devoted yourself to
the candidacy of Hillary Clinton, we wouldn't have had Trump. So they blame a kind of leftism, a material,
people who are concerned with bread and butter issues for the defeat of these candidates that have
been promoted by a party completely captured by one segment of capital who are trying to show the
American worker that they are idiots. They are racist, they're anti-immigrant, they're transphobic,
they're homophobic, they're sexist. And to some degree, this is a legacy that they've inherited
from the generation of the 68ers. I'm just younger than that generation. And I watched this generation
take over academia, destroy any kind of intellectual life and give themselves to the latest fads,
be it right now, it's artificial intelligence. You know, last year was DEI. So in 2020, it was DEI.
So these people who are supposed to be protecting our abilities to reason, research, develop knowledge
that will enhance our understanding of politics, history, culture, and the American nation, they have
completely abdicated their responsibility, and yet they want to lead us. So I'm being bullied,
members of my family who are DNC bundlers, were just using bullying tactics like,
if you don't do this, this will be the apocalypse. They speak like apocalyptic, charismatic Southern
Baptist preachers, but they despise those people at the same time. Sorry, I'm so angry right now about
the situation. Well, you saw it in the postmortems after the election. The utter, I mean, that was as
frightening as the vapid, celebrity-infused, issue-less campaign that the Democrats ran,
but you saw it afterwards. They proved utterly incapable of any kind of self-criticism,
self-examination at all. Everything became an external force, along with, as you write throughout
your book, this demonization of the American working class, which in the system, the neoliberal system
they supported saw 30 million Americans lose stable jobs in mass layoffs.
You know, the thing that really struck me was watching Pod Save America's
post-election debrief with David Plouffe, who had been the campaign manager for Obama,
and Quentin Falkes, and they were discussing the trans ad that played during the World Series. I mean,
we watched it religiously because we're in Southern California, where, you know, Trump says Kamala is
with they, them, Trump is for us or with us. And the Pod Save America guys asked Plouffe, why didn't you
respond? Why didn't you respond more forcefully? You know what he said? He goes, um, well, we focus
grouped and tested it. And that ad didn't move the needle. Like they were in a box. They didn't go
outside. They didn't talk to Americans. They didn't talk to people. They don't know people. We are more
class working people, blue collar people. We are in the most class segregated version of American society
that has ever existed. And they were just in a box, looking at their, looking at their numbers,
looking at focus groups, looking at polls. I don't know who they were paying to do that poll,
those polls, but they burned a billion dollars on them. And they thought, well, if we counterpunch,
there won't be, it won't move the needle. That's how they were making their decisions. That's how empty
their politics are. They are not committed to, um, people of, um, diverse genders or sexualities.
They were not committed to articulating a, um, universal program that would have guaranteed
people's safety, people's healthcare. You could have punched back with, you know, he's distracting
you from the fact that he's with the fat cats. I could have come up with like 500 things like he's
with Elon or he's with Gates. People don't love billionaires. We're Americans. We don't love the rich.
You know, there's a grassroots populist anger against us. He's with big pharma. You know,
they're trying to make him out as like this people's hero now because the Democrats let him
do that. They let the GOP do that. Look what they could have said he's with your landlord.
Democrats are with us or whatever Harris or the, but they have so little political sense of the
suffering of average wage workers and what they could do to alleviate that on a very, very basic
levels by raising the minimum wage by, um, you know, outlawing, um, I think, uh, insurance companies,
but there's no political will to do that because they just want to win by a thousand votes. They want
to win swing states by a thousand votes. They don't care about the polity and the people felt it.
71 million Americans understood this and they're reading their heads. Oh, the other thing is Ezra
Klein's debrief saying when he, um, um, taught, had a dialogue with Fais Shakir, the, um, former campaign
manager for Bernie Sanders. And he, they're in dialogue with each other. And Klein is saying,
I just don't understand why people are so angry. I don't understand what this populism is.
And Shakir would go through and say, this is what happened with NAFTA. This is what happened with TPP.
This is what happened with pillaging of, um, home homeowners assets in 2008, 2009. This is what
didn't happen for the democratic party. And you know what Klein would go, he'd go, I just don't
understand. I just don't understand. He doesn't want to understand because he was standing right next
to Obama during the, um, reform of American healthcare saying universal payer, can't single
payer, can't happen, can't happen. And he was part of American prospect. He was part of lobbying groups.
He was supported with every single sinecure and fellowship a democratic pundit could have, um,
received. And he was able to say next to Obama and say, single payer, not going to work. We have to
have the marketplace. We have to have the ACA. So he's responsible. So this is what I'm thinking,
Chris is when the magnitude of your error is so huge, there is no way you can have even reach
self-criticism. Like if you, if I made a mistake in my research, if you made a mistake in your research,
you can say, I'm sorry, the shop wasn't in Berlin, but I still stand by my idea that,
you know, the people, the people of Iran hated him. I don't know something, something like we could
correct, but their, their error is like, um, galactic. So you can't, they're trapped in an
echo chamber of which the media plays a very significant role where they, I mean, Thomas
Friedman gets $40,000 a lecture because he flies off to corporate weekends and tells us the corporatists
exactly what they want to hear. Um, it's, you know, how, how many times has Thomas Friedman
been wrong on, on frankly, just about everything. Um, but it's so self-referential. Yeah. That in a
way, uh, and they don't, and you're right, they live in their own kind of version, especially the
upper levels. They live, a New Yorker writer called it Richistan. They don't fly commercial jets. They,
they, they, they've utterly severed themselves from, uh, society, which is why they're so clueless and why the
moment's so dangerous and why of course, uh, Trump won and why they're so hated, um, as they should
be hated. I mean, they're pretty repugnant figures, um, scolding the rest of us constantly. Um, as you
point out, uh, in the book, uh, you said when the tide turned against American workers, the professional
managerial class preferred to fight culture wars against the classes below while currying the favor
of capitalists at once despised. The culture war was always a proxy economic war, but the 1960s divided
the country into the allegedly enlightened and the allegedly benighted with the, uh, professional
managerial class able to separate itself from its economic inferiors in a way that seemed morally
justifiable. Talk about that split, that moment. I think you actually give it a year, 1972 or something,
but talk about that split. Um, I think it really had to do with the fact that, um, the Vietnam war
was seen by, um, college educated liberal elites and radicals as being something that ha, that they
condemned on their own and that there were these, and that the America, the American people or the blue
color, uh, uh, college uneducated workers were, um, all for that war. In the wake of this, um, in the
seventies, what in the wake of the seventies, um, I think it was Barbara Ehrenreich who actually wrote
about this in the fear of falling. Um, people did studies about, um, income levels, education levels,
and attitudes towards the Vietnam war. And it turned out that the, the wealthy and the college educated were
actually much more for the Vietnam war because it skewed towards the Republicans that are, and the
blue collar people, people who did not have college educations actually had to send their sons to war.
And that in terms of population and demographics, they actually skewed more against the war than the
college educated, wealthy, um, elites. But in the mind of like the liberal professors and the pseudo radicals
who came out of 68 thinking, you know, they did yoga and they were cosmopolitan and the working people
of America were, um, benighted. They, they took this, their cosmopolitanism, their anti-war position
as a sign of their superiority and that they would have to lead the American people out of the darkness.
So, um, it was at this moment also though, that the, um, that the rate of profit and capital goes
down and the U S government decides to punish American workers with a kind of industrializing,
massive industrialization of East Asia as a bulwark against China. And, you know, the offshoring of, um,
industrial jobs begins. Then it's in, um, Jim English's book about prestige and the prestige economy
that he writes that in 1972, the weight of things produced in America starts to go down.
And so the immaterial economy like Hollywood, um, the press finance, insurance, real estate,
um, the things you can't touch, the value of the economic activity of things that have no weight goes
up and like ball bearings, cars, you know, um, forks, uh, desks, these things that were once
made blankets that were once manufactured in America, the weight of these things actually
starts to decline. So it's actually a, um, an inflection point and decisions were made by
policymakers that we're going to industrialize East Asia at the expense of the American worker.
And, you know, my family sort of benefited from it because we were, my grandmother's family was
in Taiwan. Taiwan is a first world country now. So in that sense, good, good on, it was great for
Taiwan, but in the end, this logic just extends into globalization in the 2000s, 2010s. And, you know,
you could say, well, I'm Chinese, right? This kind of, um, de-industrialization benefits China.
It does benefit China, but it was, but at what cost? And could it have been managed differently
so that, um, we don't have a devastated rust belt? We don't have, um, US steel completely
collapsing under the weight of global competition. There was a concerted effort to, um, punish the
American working class because actually there was enormous, the, the, in the countercultural foment,
we only, um, hear about Chicago and, you know, the, the hippies and the yippies demonstrating against
the war, um, in, during the democratic national convention. And we hear about Kent state, we hear
about the free speech movement. We hear about, um, um, summer of love, but, you know, in every factory,
in the Midwest, there were wildcat strikes, walkouts, sit downs, what people call quiet quitting. I mean,
um, the Chevy Noah factories were notorious for, um, GM was like, um, increasing the rate of
production. The American worker was refusing that kind of intensified tailorization. And you know
what the bosses said? They said, you know what, you guys are too much trouble. We can't handle it.
We're going to go somewhere else. We're going to take this, we're going to move this factory
somewhere else. We're going to extend the logistics lines and we're going to punish you because you
want too much. And the level of the American working class, um, lives had been raised, uh,
expectations were raised. We had our 30 years of redistribution from the top down, um, since the
second world war. And then people are, you know, the people at the top were like, you guys have too much.
We're going to take it away. And we have an intermediate class of managers and professionals
who oversaw this. Um, I'm going to give you a really specific example of how the, um, um,
credentialed elites sell out the interests of their own class and wage workers to, um, to the, um,
bosses to the capitalists. The UC system is a 10 campus system, a public university,
and we have a board of regents who is appointed by the, um, governor. You appointed board of regents
who will, um, who are extremely wealthy people who will donate to the university because the
university is being starved by budget cut after budget cut and the California tax revolt. So recently
we've had a lot of campus arrests, um, unrest, as you know, with faculty and students protesting on
behalf of, um, Palestine and against the genocide of their people and the destruction of Gaza. Um,
the board of regents met yesterday. They want people to be punished. And they were speaking to our
provost, Catherine Newman from Berkeley, who is a professor. And they said to her three of the
regents, big fat cat money guys. Um, you know, we want to be able to move to punish faculty.
We don't like faculty governance. It's go, it's too slow. It is not working. And this woman,
this high level manager who probably makes like 500 to $800,000 a year, um, twice, three times,
four times, five times what, um, professors make, because in this, we are the wage workers here.
She's our manager. And then you have the bosses or the regents. Um, she said, yes, yes. Um,
we're going to get on it and we are going to make a committee. Um, and she goes, we can do something
by July. And they're like, no, no, because they're all fucking CEOs and C-suite guys. So they're like,
no, it has to be made. It has to be fabulous. This is not working. Faculty governance is not working.
It's the pride of the UC system that we have a faculty Senate instead of a union
who is supposed to represent the interests of the professors with regard to the administrators,
the chancellors, and now increasingly the donors and the regents. And we have a woman,
Catherine Newman, who is selected to be, you know, the highest level under the chancellor,
under the president, Michael Drake, and she is rolling over. She's basically saying, okay,
okay, you're right. You're right. We need to move faster. Um, July is too late. Let's try to do
something. She's plague. Her interests are to please the regents, not to protect academic freedom,
not to protect the faculty that she manages, not to protect the integrity of the university.
So we have seen this university be destroyed by the interests of the capitalists. And Newsom
is totally responsible because he appointed those people. They are Philistines. They hate the university
and they hate the idea that there are people who they can't fire. So they're basically like
democratic versions of Trump and they are, they have a lot more hypocritical, um, attitudes about
culture and about how they love the humanities. So I can totally vibe, understand the average American
going, you know what? I would prefer the real thing, red blood, red meat, you know, hate workers,
but, um, speak my anger guy. Then those of you who are telling me I'm inferior,
who tell me that my life, my, my, my life choices are terrible and who are going to punish me anyway.
I'd rather be punished by the big orange baby than by the, you know, uh, Ozempic, um, Ozempic shooting,
you know, Halloween, Hollywood, um, liberal mogul was like, there's a, you know, the, the fact that I
would say this now, it could be a breach of academic, um, propriety on their part. They want to decide
who they can fire. They don't want to have, um, um, tenure or peer review or anything into, um,
be intermediates or process, due process. All of that is too, going too slow. It's not working.
They said this, it's not working. And so it's very clear that they have, um, a handy, a handmaid
in this woman who's going to execute their will, who, who said she was going to execute their will,
who didn't give them a single word of pushback when they said faculty governance is not working.
Everything should be on the table. This means they should be able to fire professors at will.
Well, that's been true at universities across the country. They coordinated all summer, uh,
to impose all these draconian rules to create these academic gulags. You can't flyer, you can't
forget encampments, uh, at the few handful of professors, uh, and then the students,
they're on probation up the street at Princeton. Rua Benjamin's teaching on probation. Uh, so,
uh, that's hardly limited to Irvine. Um, and the UC, the UC, this is Berkeley. This is the entire UC
system, right? They are coordinated. They're, they're, they're talking to each other. They're talking to
each other. Yeah. Yeah. Completely. They just had to bring down the hammer. Sorry. I want to talk about
what the, this professional managerial class, because it's worse than of course, virtue signaling
and, uh, demonizing, uh, the ungrateful, uh, working class. My mother's family's from Maine,
they come out of the working class as I've seen what's happened up there. It's awful. Um, so, uh,
you write, they've hollowed out public goods. They've degraded the public sphere, facilitated the
monetization of everything from health to aptitude and indebted generations of Americans in a fantasy
of meritocracy, enhanced social mobility. I think it's, I think one of the things that leads to,
I'm just going to read another great passage. He wrote, Trump never promised to be virtuous.
His id driven politics and lack of self-control form the core of his appeal to those who felt scorned
by the liberal superego. To defeat reactionary politics masquerading as populism, we need an
anti-professional managerial class struggle from the left, not more identity politics,
politics, which has become just another vehicle of professional managerial class virtue signaling.
Um, I mean, my argument, and I think it's yours, is that the creation of Trump and the rise of these
Christian fascists, uh, was, uh, is totally at the, uh, the fault of this professional managerial class
and the democratic party and these liberals that all of the hatred that has been, uh, leveled at them,
they deserve. Yeah, I agree. I agree. I totally agree. I mean, we, we have to agree. We, um, you know,
the thing is that I feel that we should, on the left, we shouldn't be single issue people.
With regard to Israel and Palestine, but since they've made this a litmus test,
um, now we all have to gather around and defend the people's right to protest this. The, um,
the big, the, the larger term issue for me is how can we return to bread and butter issues, to re,
to undoing private equities, um, hold on real estate, on health, on education. And I don't see the
Democrats having any path forward on this. And, you know, I don't see, this is what makes me really,
really, um, pessimistic is that, as you said, you opened up with the idea that they don't have any
capacity for self-criticism. I don't see that this defeat is an educational one for them at all. And
that's, what's really appalling. Um, the, you know, that I wrote that around Trump one,
but Trump two is, um, all of this even more intensified with the Bernie Sanders, um,
moment receding in memory, because there was a moment when Trump was elected in 2016,
when I felt that the democratic party, um, thought that it had to attend to Bernie Sanders concerns,
but that, but when they replaced Sanders with Biden, the other old white guy, they felt that they could,
um, sort of mon, you know, Frankenstein together, uh, kind of good old boy and it's, and, um,
woke politics, uh, protecting, with protecting, um, capital at the end. And, um, the, the Bernie Sanders
concerns got more marginalized after, um, Biden was elected because they were like, okay, you guys,
you assholes. So you can't, you can't, um, elect your guy. We've got our guy. Um, but between 2016 and
2020, there was strangely like an openness to talking about economic redistribution. And then,
um, that kind of closed down when they, there was telling us that, you know, Biden was the best
president for labor since FDR. The, um, American recovery act was, you know, inflation reduction act
was fantastic. Um, it really helped people a lot. It was building American infrastructure and American
capacity, but for some reason, none of the, none of those policies stuck. And, you know, there are people
on the left who say that, you know, not even people's economists say, and I mean, some leftists
too, that the inflation reduction act actually produced more inflation. We have so much inflation
than the incumbent is definitely incumbent party will definitely lose. So why isn't there an articulation
of what it means of how inflation has been used to punish working class people?
And how can we fight inflation, you know, with the government on our side? Like there was no
articulation of a collective project. Um, uh, they took the, you know, American inflation reduction
act and started using it. Like, you know, we've done all these great things. And the reality is that
young people today have very little hope when they come out of college, the, um, jobs are not there for
them. They're in debt. And then working class people have even less hope. So you have actually
finding a way of living with dignity that were, that, um, was cemented into this promise of post-war
America, which had to do with social mobility and certain, um, um, certain things like just like, um,
um, vacation time or an eight hour day. Now we all have to like be hustle culture, 16 hour days,
seven days a week. And we, um, take that as take it for granted. And there was no, there was no vision
of a better society that we could be building. Biden did not provide that. I mean, and, and as
his faculties declined, it got worse and worse, but his proxies and the people under him were, um, using
the culture wars to cement the new democratic, um, majority, which, uh, which has completely fallen
apart because you cannot, if you cannot provide for people at a very basic level, you can lecture them
all you want about how great the, um, Obamacare is. Obamacare might cover more people than was
than before it existed. But for a family of four people are paying thousands of dollars a month
with a deductible of $5,000 still. So it doesn't really, it didn't really alleviate the pressure of
healthcare on working in middle-class people. Very, very poor people might be able to do Medi-Cal or
Medicare, but in the middle of wage worker is being punished from, um, every single level on
the level of healthcare. They're not serious people. They did not take this issue seriously.
If they just had focused on one serious issue like this, I would have given them all of their
identity politics. If they had just said, let's do single payer, but they couldn't, they kept adjusting,
tuning the buttons. Well, they, what do you mean? They hired, they got Liz Fowler to block single
payer. That was Obama's legacy. And everyone was forced to buy their defective product,
which boosted the profits of the insurance industries and everyone else. I mean, the,
it's just one betrayal after another. Uh, and, uh, you know, I, I, you may know I worked for Ralph
Nader. I was a speechwriter. Uh, but Ralph finally ran for president, uh, because he said at this point,
uh, he used to write legislation and have liberals like Fulbright or others push it through. They
were all pushed out. They were all gone, especially under, by the time Clinton came around, they all
became corporatized. Uh, Clinton did tremendous damage, uh, destroyed welfare. 70% of the original
recipients were children. I want to talk about the left. Um, uh, and you've been very critical,
I think correctly of the left and how it has, uh, uh, essentially, uh, uh, cannibalized itself,
uh, and left us in a very frightening position because of course, if we go back to the breakdown
of capitalism in the 1930s, it was a strong militant left, the old CIO, the communist party
that saved us from fascism, which was ran like an undercurrent here as it did in Europe.
Uh, but that, that left is gone, uh, partly because labor unions have been, uh, destroyed.
That's been, uh, you went back to when we talked about that period in the sixties or the fifties,
when you had a rising income and, and, uh, I think we got up to about 36% unionized works,
workers were, were empowered economically and to a certain extent, politically, the democratic
party certainly had to take them into consideration. And, uh, and of course that frightened the capital
is class that was part of the backlash, but now we're, we really are completely disempowered.
11% of the workforce is unionized. I think 6% of them are public sector. Many of them cannot
strike. We saw that with Biden shutting down the railroad freight workers, uh, which are,
and their work conditions are just awful. If these skeleton crews and very dangerous,
let's talk about the left. What's happened to the left?
Well, what left are you talking about? Are you talking about like DSA or talking about, um,
um, this, well, I guess let's talk about the phantom. Yeah, there is no left. The phantom left.
Let's talk about the phantom left. Uh, let's talk about what happened. There used to be a left in
this country. I mean, go back to the eve of world war one, uh, Debs, the socialists, the wobblies, uh,
and you know, there's been a, just a steady assault, uh, against the left. Uh, um, I mean,
the red scare and Alan Trecker wrote great work on this. Uh, I mean, we are, we're at a very,
I think very dangerous moment where those of us who care about, uh, some kind of equality and, uh,
fairness and, uh, you know, uh, distribution of wealth and all that, we're completely disempowered.
Yep. Yep. I mean, the, the thing is that the left, so the right confuses the liberals and the left,
right? And the liberals actually hate the left. Um, what they imagine is left. I just read, um, um,
the liberal Patriot that, um, substack where he said, you know, it's the leftists who are willing
to die on all these hills, like of identity politics and of Palestine and they're killing,
we have to ignore them. We have to go back to the center and, um, they're actually, and, and, um,
there's this boogeyman that, you know, is powerful in doing these things. Um, the phantom left that,
uh, and I feel that, you know, most, um, most left organizations or media that, that have some kind
of power like dissent or the, or the nation or even Jacobin, they've been totally, um, appropriated by
liberals. They don't really have a strong materialist edge any longer. And, um, because the,
the thing is that the politics of identity have become so pitched that nobody wants to criticize
what has happened with, um, the democratic party and human resources appropriation of, um, identity
politics to divide us on the, and, and make us ignore the, uh, material questions that really
should be preoccupying us. Like every day we should be talking about private equity, but if we're talking
about DEI and we're talking about like under, underrepresented minorities, and we're talking
about equity and not equality, we're not going to be talking about what private equity is actually
doing to every single sector of the American economy. And I think that even like the left
journals who have been, um, um, you know, representative of certain more materialist point of view,
it's been very, very hard to get traction with that because immediately, if you criticize
the identity politics aspect or of, um, liberal politics, you're called a racist, you're called a
transphobe, you're called, you know, um, a nationalist. Um, so it's been really, it, you, there's no,
there's no traction to create like a liberal left dialogue that can actually create, that can actually
produce an alliance like the tea party and the mainstream GOP that moved the GO, the move the
Republicans to the right over the past 25 years. If you can't have that productive antagonism and you
have one side saying you guys are all, um, just demonic because you criticize our positions and
identity and, and the left can say like people like me or people like you who take the risk to say,
you know, these DI policies, they destroy solidarity. They destroy, um, any kind of, um, class solidarity or
class feeling they're designed to manage difference rather than, um, produce equality and justice. We,
you know, systematically get marginalized by, um, the left powers that be, I'm never going to get
a grant from Guggenheim, Mellon or MacArthur. I don't fucking care, but they really do control
what can be said on the, you know, in, in a professional sphere because we're in the media,
we're in academia and there's no, you know, I'm happy to go on Fox. I'm happy to go on CNN. I'm happy
to go and tell people that there are people in the world who identify as the left who don't like this
culture wars thing, who do feel like we are gotten far, far away from, um, the values of the working
class, which should be about bread and butter material issues. Why isn't that voice out there?
It should just be out there. Something that we don't demonize that we feel like we have to contend with
the class issue. And also the question of whether or not we can have a strong left without a strong and
industrial base and that strong industrial base has been destroyed. And how do we actually rebuild
that and is, and we should be asking this question too, is a white collar union as good as a blue
collar union? You know, I would say no, but it's, it's still a union, right? But we should be talking
about these things. And the other thing about it is, um, class is not a moral category. I don't use it
to demonize people when I go, you know, this is a PMC position. People are like, oh my God, you have a
degree from an Ivy league school. You're a professor. It is not a moral position. It is a social position.
And as a social position, it's political valence can change depending upon the social situation. So,
um, there are, um, people who believe that the professional managerial class can become a progressive
force. I do not, but we can have this discussion. Um, we could have, we can air this, we can air it out.
I don't believe that we should lead with vanguard identity positions. When I suggested this on Twitter
in the middle of the, um, pandemic, um, my erstwhile friend, Doug Henwood led a Twitter mob on me who,
um, excoriated my position, said I was a transphobe, told me to kill myself. And this was immediately
silence. Like people were in my DMS go, they scared the shit out of me because they were, I thought it
was just saying like, maybe DSA shouldn't start the meetings with what I called the pronoun ritual.
And it just, and the attacks on me were insane. And all I had said was a, um, I told him an
anecdote about a friend of mine who had brought a group of union workers, hotel workers to a DSA meeting.
And these women, um, left quietly before the introductions were done because they took so long
with the, um, pronouns. Um, people said, have you ever been misgendered? You're, you know,
you're a transphobe. I was thinking about my aunt who is a member of Unite Here 11. She barely speaks
English. She loves her union. If she was brought to a DSA meeting and people are introducing themselves
with pronouns, she would be thinking she's getting an English lesson after work. And she would want to
go home and spend that time with her husband and make, make dinner for her daughter. Right?
What is the political meaning of that to a person? Everyone in every single, every single Chinese
person I know is constantly misgendering everyone because we only have a neutral, um, third person
pronoun. Right? So what is, what does that mean to her? You know, what does a DSA meeting mean to her?
If people are, you know, using the strange ritual that has nothing to do with what she thinks of as
the benefits of her union. She loves her union. She doesn't need DSA. So you see right there, DSA is
playing this liberal vanguard position and making it possible for immigrant women like my aunt to even
understand that unionism and leftism might actually have something to do with each other because DSA is
already playing vanguard identity politics. And people called me the worst names possible. And I'm
just, and I was just saying, and I, you know, I challenged them. I challenged them to tell me if
they have a fucking family member in the United Year 11.
Well, the, you know, Ralph used to say, what we have to do is organize unions at Walmart. And it
doesn't really matter whether anyone's voting for Trump or how politically correct they are.
And he said, uh, not only is that what we have to be doing, but that in itself is educational and
it teaches them where the centers of power are. Yeah. Uh, which is like with a Walton family that makes
what, $11,000 an hour for doing nothing or something. Right. And it's not about like your,
your adapt, adaptation to a new, um, identity. It's about, you can have a different view of that.
You can have a different view of immigration, but you can still be allied with each other in
your struggle to strip away more profits from the Walton family. Yeah. Yeah. And that's, and, and,
but it's a diversion from confronting centers of power. Confronting centers of power is hard and
difficult. And identity politics is extremely capital is complicated capital. There are fewer
capitalists and there are workers, but capital is kind of improvisational. It's organized and it's,
it's, um, it's extremely powerful. I don't even know why we have to say things like this, but this
idea of, um, these distractions really minimize the, the complexity of the battles ahead.
I got to ask you about this chapter. The professional managerial class has sex. You write
the sexual revolutionary to whom we owe many of our progressive ideals about sex is the Marquis de Sade,
an aristocratic class trader and a hopeless sexual deviant. He was a supporter of the French
revolution who spent much of his life in miserable prison cells writing pornography. I mean, I, I, I
totally agree with you. I wrote about kink.com and one of my books, I went out to the video news
convention where the porn industry was for another, that was empire of illusion. But anyway, talk about
that. I'm totally on board. Um, Oh, about, well, from this, from this enlightenment moment when,
um, the Marquis de Sade was actually really smart guy. And he said, if there is no God, then of course
everything is permitted and we can use other people for our pleasure. The beginning of sadism. Um, this
was a vanguard position, deviant, anti-social vanguard position in the, um, during the French revolution,
which is why after the revolution, he was locked up again. But, um, he was thinking about, he was thinking
about how, um, every form of perversion should be permitted and therefore the French revolution
should liberate us from any belief in sin in the Catholic church and power would power and pleasure
would become part of everyone's, um, everyone's, um, field of activity. And strangely enough, this
kind of logic is part of the logic of the counterculture where it believed that it had invented new forms
of sexual relation designed to, um, tread the edges of what was humanly permissible. You know, the most
extreme forms of academic, um, sexual, um, identities say that, you know, we can be transhuman, we're not human.
We, um, are, you know, we, we can, um, there are different combinations of human machine, human animal,
et cetera, et cetera. And, um, of course I'm saying, I'm talking about the most parodic, um, exaggerations,
but during the sixties and seventies, sexual liberation, I think became a question of another
professional manager class managed, um, rationalized set of activities where the PMC believed that you could
read books and then have the best sex ever. And that fulfillment, sexual fulfillment, as it comes
from the enlightenment comes from this kind of sexual liberation. The fact of the matter is that
working class people, normal people, you know, what people on the internet called trad people,
traditional people, but traditional ideas of partnership and family include a notion of sacrifice
and honor. And this is out of the picture for this, for the counter culturalists and the hippies,
where everything is just about fulfillment. And you can see it's parodic and, um, elaboration in
a figure like Elon Musk, because, and all the billionaire oligarchs who are moving from wife one,
two, three, four, five, because there's something about like sexual fulfillment for them that is made
available through power. And, and the whole idea, and this is, and this is what, um, a lot of my radical
liberal, um, colleagues would find really normative and horrible for me, but the whole idea that human
beings are, were limited in our expressions and should be limited by social responsibilities, domestic
responsibilities. And that this idea of sacrificing fulfillment and expression is a highly social
thing to be engaged in, even in the absence of God. Um, this idea has been completely lost to the PMC
who want to be radical. And, and one of the things that, one of the biggest ads, um, that you see on
social media targeting middle-aged men is, you know, um, all of these, um, you know, Viagra-like
products now, you know, that you should be virile till the end of your life, satisfy your woman. There
is no limit to pleasure and expressivity and fulfillment. And I really feel like there's their,
their, um, um, ancestor is the Marquis de Saad because that's the, the limitless idea of pleasure in
the absence of God, this kind of antisocial deviance that can produce, you know, um, personal
fulfillment. This is like the ironic legacy. Uh, and I think Saad was clever enough to be ironic
about this of a kind of pure emancipation of the sexual drives. And, um, um, there's obviously like
enormous amounts of discontent in marriages. There's patriarchy and everything that comes with it. But I
have, I was also really directing this at second wave feminism, which was so focused on, um, sexual
fulfillment and expressivity for white collar, college, college-educated professional manager
class women. I mean, literally Betty Friedan said, we have all these women at home discontented in their,
um, in their suburban homes in 1959. If only they could be liberated to compete with men on the job
market. If only they could be liberated to realize themselves sexually on the sexual market comes next
after that. Sorry, that was a very long quote. Well, it's also the way that they've redefined. I mean, Hillary
Clinton did this. They redefined the notion of feminism where feminism becomes about becoming a CEO of a big
company, not about empowering working women. I'll go back to Andrea Dworkin. It's, uh, but it's that again,
it's that kind of, uh, inversion of values where, uh, uh, it's, uh, you know, the breaking a glass ceiling
for a privileged, uh, empowered woman rather than empowering a group.
Or rather than seeing in your struggles, the struggles of other people and in your six and your
success is not a political thing. It's not a political achievement for other women.
And I don't understand why people could promote themselves like this, except that they were so
identified with professional success. I just want to ask, I am totally, uh, with you on the inability
of the democratic party to reform itself. I don't think they want to, they're a creature of corporate
money. Uh, these figures, Pelosi, Schumer, who wants them, Harris, they wouldn't be there if they
didn't, what'd she get? What was her campaign? Over a billion dollars. They wouldn't be there
without that money. So they'd lose political power. I think they'd rather, you know, have a first class
cabin while the ship goes down and give that up. Um, but we are in big trouble, um, uh, in, in a very
anemic dysfunctional democracy. Uh, I spent a long time writing a book on the Christian right, American
fascists, the Christian right in the war in America. I, and I'm a divinity school graduate. Uh, these
people are very frightening, uh, theocratic monsters. I mean, they're going to the UN, they're, uh,
Mike Huckabee, and you know, they've, they're, they essentially have adopted the language of these
radical messianic, uh, Zionists, uh, Judean, Samaria, and everything. We're not headed in a good place.
And, uh, what do we do? I mean, the, the, the, the, the liberal class is, uh, uh, imploding or
dysfunctional, hated with good reason. The left is tearing itself apart with, uh, you know, boutique
activism and culture wars. What's the exit? How do we get out of this? I don't, I wish, I wish I had a
better answer for that. I'm so sorry. Um, I turn my phone off. Um, I wish I had a good answer for that,
but what I, um, can say is that on a geopolitical level, the decline of empires is very, very ugly.
And from, um, within the, within Chinese history, the end of dynasties always produces millenarism
and cultishness. And, um, when you have this kind of cultishness on the left, millenarism on the right,
um, there is no functioning democracy. There is no possibility of reasonable debate or reasoned, um,
um, a reason politics. However, I do feel like there's, I know this sounds crazy, but
the liberals have been so powerful and so hegemonic within all of the institutions,
um, that we've described earlier, but they were repudiated. And I do have some hope that there is
a kind of baseline American sense of anti-authoritarianism and, um, egalitarianism
that will emerge when Trump's excesses become too obvious. And I think that we have to
speak to the anti-authoritarianism, anti-authoritarian egalitarian leanings of the country that we live
in, not pretend that we live in another country, not try to flee from this country, not try to
reinvent this country from the ground up. But there is, I find a craving, um, among my students,
among the people who read the book, who've been reaching out to me, a craving for a kind of left
driven community that takes the social issues seriously, that can, um, that wants to channel
this anger for social ends, not for the enrichment of others. I think that the more we see of the
oligarchs, the more hideous they will become. And we have to be there ready to organize that anger,
or at least to give voice to it and to listen to it because, um, it, the, I guess I'm, I'm very
frightened, but I'm, I also have like a typically American somewhat like optimism within me that the,
the populist repudiation of liberal hegemony, even though it does give birth to these kinds of, um,
right wing extremism and aberrations. I don't think it can be reduced to that. I think there's
a rejection of, um, the Democrats. There was a rejection of the Democrats more than an absolute
embrace of, um, the GOP in the last election. So that gives me some, that gives me some kind of hope.
Thanks, Catherine. We were discussing Catherine Lou's book,
Virtue Hoarders, The Case Against the Professional Managerial Class. Uh, I want to thank Diego,
Sophia, Thomas, and Max who produced the show. You can find me at chrishedges.substack.com.
Thank you.
Thank you.
