When I was a child, I heard about this madman called the Unabomber, named Ted Kaczynski.
He was this crazy guy who launched a bunch of bombs, and he wanted us to return to being
Stone Age tribes, supposedly. He was also a genius who had a math degree from Harvard,
and built up a brilliant plan to destroy modern civilization.
From all of this, he sounds like a classic comic book villain, but in real life. The
sort of thing Marvel would make up. This also all occurred like 10 years earlier,
and was something adults still had in the back of their minds, but not something which they brought
up that much. Something very important happened in the next 10 years after I grew into an adult.
The world around us changed. I like to say that the only way I could explain the America
we live in today, to my childhood self, is that we turned into a sci-fi dystopia.
In this context, the attitudes towards the Unabomber changed very markedly.
Among disaffected young male circles, he's become known as Uncle Ted. As the society we
live in has deteriorated before our own very eyes, people have gone back through the Unabomber's
work, and thought a lot of it seems quite prescient. This video is meant to be a sort of
day in court for the Unabomber. As someone who never lived through the event, I hope to be
objective about this historic figure. He died of suicide last year in federal prison in North
Carolina, so I guess this is some form of bladed obituary. We will look through the Unabomber's
life to see whether or not he was right or wrong.
Hi everybody, I'm Rudyard the Woodifaltist Guy, and the Unabomber wrote very extensively about the
dangers of industrial civilization. And one of those dangers is data brokers who collect and distribute
your private information. That's why I use Incogni, the sponsor of today's video. Data brokers
collect all your private information, like your address, birthday, online activity, and even stuff
like your financial information and security card number. This information can be sold without your
consent and used for various websites where anyone can look this data up and then use it to stalk you.
And again, all of this happens without your knowledge or control. The good news is that you can request
for this data to be removed, and the bad news is that it could take years to do so manually.
That's where our sponsor Incogni comes in. They make the process of taking back control of your
information quick and easy. Their service will work on your behalf to contact these data brokers and
request the removal of your information while keeping you informed and in the loop the whole time.
You just create the account, grant Incogni the right to work for you, and sit back and watch them do the work.
They'll even handle objections for you. Incogni goes above and beyond to give you back control of your
personal information. For my fans, they're offering 60% off for an annual plan for anyone who clicks the link below
and uses the code WHATIFALTIST. They offer a 30-day back money guarantee, so there's no reason to not click the link and start using Incogni today.
Part one, Kaczynski as a man. There's this whole intellectual school of death of an author, which
basically says you shouldn't judge authors for their own personal lives, but rather their body of work.
I think this is a tool which was invented to counteract the Marxist tendency to trawl through
the personal lives of authors they dislike, to create ad hominem to discredit ideas they don't want to
actually have to deal with at face value. I don't really like this mental model, though. If you read
the history of philosophy, for example, it's really clear that the essence of a philosopher is imbibed
into his philosophy. Another intellectual variant of this is the founder effect, which my friend Sam
Obergia discovered, or that the character of the founder of an organization can be seen replicated
across its internal structure long after his death. With Kaczynski, as an individual, he lived a very
interesting life just by itself. So let's look through that. Kaczynski was born into a working-class
Polish-American family. Surprise! In Chicago in 1942. He was incredibly intelligent and graduated high school,
going to college at age 15. When his IQ was tested, it was 167, which is something around the
one-millionth percentile for IQ, which is basically at the protected national treasure threshold for
intelligence. He went to Harvard, and his original plan was to be an academic. Next comes a point in
his life, which in general, again, seems like a story that would be written by Marvel, but which nearly
jumps the shark plot-wise. When he was at Harvard, he participated in a legal government testing program
called MKUltra. This was part of the CIA's research into brainwashing, the paranormal, and psychedelics.
If you're interested in this kind of stuff, watch the video I made about the decades worth of research
the CIA put into their explorations of the spirit world. Keep in mind, MKUltra is not a conspiracy
theory. We have loads of records of people who were involved, and the CIA has even released their own
documents saying they did it. MKUltra involved the CIA using psychedelics, hypnosis, sensory deprivation,
isolation, verbal or sexual abuse, and sleep deprivation. Another important variable is that
when the CIA realized that MKUltra would get out and would make them look very bad, they shredded a lot
of the documents. This really does beg the question, what else were they doing that they don't want us to
know about? Keep in mind, this is a government agency that releases what it wants us to see. We've seen
other stuff come out in that time period of the CIA manipulating the news, doing research in the spirit
world, manipulating foreign governments, funding modern art, the feminist movement, selling coke in
Latin America, or crack in inner-city ghettos. Again, this is what we know about. Kaczynski was involved
in this in which we know at least that he was part of an experiment in which the government agents
tried to break apart his worldview. He would posit his ideas out the world, and then the CIA agents
tried everything they could to rip it apart on any level. Someone's worldview is the reason they have
to live, and so doing this as an experiment without his consent is just incredibly cruel. We also have
records of the CIA verbally and emotionally abused him. Again, this is what we know happened. Men tend to
not talk about abuse that readily, especially back then, and especially with the perpetrator being an
obscenely powerful government agency, so it wouldn't surprise me if Kaczynski went through a lot worse
that we don't know about. As I read about his biography, first of all, it's obvious that Kaczynski
wasn't comfortable in his own skin. He was constantly wandering around, clearly trying to find some kind of
escape. He lived off the grid in the woods of Montana, left academia because he couldn't take it. He felt
immense shame for this and tried to go to a psychiatrist about it, but didn't trust them.
As someone with PTSD, it's so clear and obvious to me that Kaczynski has PTSD, or had. There's just
no way he doesn't. He acts exactly how someone with unhealed PTSD would. I can very easily see how the
trauma he faced around his experiences with the CIA would inform his views on modern civilization,
in that this faceless bureaucracy did something objectively evil, and then faced zero consequences.
He saw firsthand the bureaucratic state of the banality of evil, having no qualms about manipulating
human nature to make people more docile or brainwash them. I can immediately hear people
saying that his trauma made him biased, but what I would say is let's look at his ideas out of their
own merit, rather than looking for an ad hominem takedown. After his murders, Kaczynski was diagnosed
with schizophrenia. I don't want to overextend my armchair psychologist credentials, in that my only
pretensions to this field are having read a few dozen books on it, but I don't get any sense that
he was a schizophrenic. I know what paranoid schizophrenia looks like, and it's not that.
Through reading his manifesto, if he was actually schizophrenic, you would see jarring logical and
writing style gaps in his work, which just aren't there. Schizophrenics don't have a coherent sense
of the world, and that the world seems discreet, atomized, or cold to them. Kaczynski, even through
the intense genius through which he carried out his terrorism, demonstrates that he had a pretty
good grip on reality. When he was tried, Kaczynski's lawyers begged him to plead insanity. He refused,
which I see as admirable, in that by pleading insanity, he would devalue his own manifesto as the
ravings of a madman. He did plead guilty, thus for receiving eight consecutive life sentences.
I guess he's got a lot of jail time for his future Hindu afterlives.
The irony is that by diagnosing him as a schizophrenic, the society was literally just
proving his point. One of the great ironies I see personally is when a system or person
literally validates what you just said with their actions after you told them what they're doing,
but they lack the self-awareness to realize they're doing it. I see it a lot with political
radicals, in which I'll tell them that they've lost the ability to think rationally and have
devolved into ad hominems. Then in response to that, they remain irrational and throw ad hominems at me.
The Unabomber said that modern civilization is an all-encompassing bureaucratic machine which exists
to consume the human soul. Look at how that machine responded to his life. It said he was insane to
invalidate his ideas. Recognizing his sanity would be too difficult since we'd have to think about
whether or not he was correct. It used a bureaucratic system to carry out this power play,
and then locked him up in another bureaucratic system. It's comparable to how in the Soviet Union
they would send political dissenters to mental asylums, since if you weren't acclimated to the
society, you were by definition not mentally adjusted. Modern society does this very well,
telling dissenters they have anger issues or are repressed. Just look at the authoritarian
personality as an example, which was a psychological manual that became incredibly popular in that it
basically created the modern political spectrum and culture in about a dozen different ways,
which I explained through this text wall. It said that conservatism, or being against leftism,
was a mental illness caused by repressive parenting. Thus we had to make parenting more
permissive so we could leave behind our racism and irrational conservatism. With all this going on,
the Unabomber didn't get tenure in academia. He had tried to become a math professor, and many of the
teachers or co-workers he worked with have publicly stated that he was one of the most intelligent people
they had ever met. His area of study is again math, which I could see very easily from the logical
structure through which he wrote his manifesto. He developed some new, incredibly advanced mathematical
theories that one of his colleagues wrote only about a dozen people around the country are capable
of even comprehending it. Kaczynski developed a theory that our society is based off doing surrogates for
real things. It's an idea I see reflected in Baudrillard's Simulacrum, or that everything in our society is a
fourth level abstraction of something real. Junk food is an abstraction of real food. Social media
of real community. Walmart of a general store. We do things like play video games since the actual
things that video games simulate, like hunting or waging war, which our ancestors actually did,
are too destabilizing to the complex interconnected machine that is industrial civilization. This is very
obvious in academia, in which academics are the most over-socialized demographic out there. If you
know academics, you know that they as a demographic, with some exceptions, are cowardly, envious, anxious,
process-driven, and stuck in their heads. They are exemplifications of the over-socialization, which was the
main crux of the Unabomber's critique of modernity. I can empathize with Ted that while he was thinking
about the great issues bedeviling modernity, he saw their exact reflections inside academia.
Yet academia lacked the self-awareness or wisdom to see his ideas at their own face value. Academia today
is a bureaucratic machine which doesn't reward genius anymore, and just spits out engineered products
which benefit their class interests. The Unabomber then moved back to his family in Illinois first,
and then became a homesteader, living off the grid in rural Montana. He lived off the land without
electricity when foraging and farming for his own survival. Over time he realized that this was
basically an impossible life today. Partly it was the environmental degradation he saw caused by large
companies, and also the government just doesn't like people living outside of their sphere of control.
This made him decide to turn violent. This is what made the Unabomber famous. He delivered and sent
bombs which killed three people and injured 23. He aimed at the leaders of technological industries,
in that he blamed the industrial revolution for the over-socialization which he worried about would
destroy the human race. We will explain why he made this calculation in the next chapter.
He did a brilliant job at doing this, demonstrating his intelligence isn't purely academic. He did such a
good job that the FBI couldn't find him for the longest time, turning his crimes into a sensational
national story. The name Unabomber stems from the FBI case, University and Airline Bomber,
given Kaczynski targeted airlines and universities which specialized in technology. His goal was to
make these fields terrifying for evil to work in, thus slowing down technological development. He was only
caught since he told a major newspaper that he would stop killing if they published his manifesto.
His brother was able to study the writing tics and style that the Unabomber used. His brother gave
the government a lead on him, turning him in. The feds were finally able to capture him in his
isolated Montana cabin, sending him to jail. Kaczynski's thesis with what's wrong with modernity is actually
pretty simple. The thesis is that modernity is such a complex interconnected system that it forces humans
to operate like cogs in a machine. Repressing the things that make us human in order that the
machine runs more smoothly. It's easiest to start explaining this by giving one example I've found,
which does fit into this logical scheme, that being family structure. For most of history,
as I've explained in this video, the family was the most important thing in life. In most societies
over history, your family determines your work, your spouse, the education system, social network,
insurance, among anything else. People lived in large clan compounds in which extended families
supported each other. Even in non-clan individualist societies, like Christian Western Europe, the
family was still an incredibly integral aspect of daily life. If you look at family today, and this
isn't just true in the Western world, you can see that it's a shell of its former self. Half of marriages
end in divorce. Most young people don't get married. Marital happiness rates have crashed. It's completely
normal for family members to never see each other, or not even really like each other. This is something
that the rest of history would view as completely incomprehensible, or even evil. What happened in
modernity which precipitated this? I recently read an interesting book called The History of Work. It talks
about how people's daily work has changed over human history. One of the fascinating things it talks
about is that the family was super important in a pre-industrial society, given the family was the
dominant economic unit. There is basically no parallel in the pre-industrial world, except for
slavery, of clocking in at a giant company and then working 10 hours a day, 5 days a week. Almost
everyone were independent renting farmers or self-employed. Besides them, you had craftsmen,
merchants, or the nobility. All of these were family businesses. Keep in mind that pre-industrial
Europe was incredibly moderate by the standards of this stuff. What this meant is that the family
was critically important to this society. You had to get along with your family since your dad was your
boss. Then when your parents were old, you had to take care of them. The husband and wife was an
economic unit in which the husband secured resources and the wife took care of the children,
or passive tasks. You have more kids since they're free labor for your small business.
This all made perfect sense and seemed completely intuitive and obvious to everyone involved.
The idea of entrenched social classes or casts made sense given your family supplied your work,
education, social network, and spouse. Thus people ended up associating with their own class,
which crystallized. You can also see why the state was incredibly weak in these societies,
in which in most pre-industrial societies, 70% of the state's budget went into the military,
while the government made up something between 1-5% of the nation's total economy,
while in most western countries today it's between a half to two-thirds.
The family performed all the functions that the state does today. Likewise, you can see why religion is
incredibly important since without the ability to have rules for interpersonal relationships,
the entire society falls apart since it's all based upon social relationships.
Let's look at what industrialization did to this. Firstly, if everyone lives in a big city or a suburb,
the sorts of communities that developed in pre-industrial villages naturally can no longer exist.
The scale just gets too big. I think you can't overestimate the importance of this. When you move from a
community where everyone knows everyone with their quirks, strengths, or weaknesses to anonymity,
our brains process that completely differently, society changes from an accumulation of relationships
you have with everyone involved to a series of bureaucracies which provide you services.
When you're operating at the scale of modernity, with the atomization that goes with urbanization,
this means that bureaucracies fill the void which community and family used to. Rather than working
on the family farm, dad works at a big company. We're at the point where 75% of adult women work,
which is statistically more than any demographic wanted. Thus, the wife also works independently.
Then child rearing is what happens when the parents are free. The child rearing itself,
however, is mostly outsourced to schools and daycares depending on social class.
What you might notice is that for most of the waking hours, the family members don't associate
with each other. In the pre-industrial society, a wife would respect her husband since she was dependent
upon him for survival, and she saw him daily, or the things that he did to support her and the family.
When you work with someone, it creates a bonding and shared experience. Now, she and her husband are
apart for most of the day, then they return together for a relatively short nighttime, which is often used to
accomplish various boring tasks. The same thing is true with school, in which the kids spend most of
their waking day in effort at school. In this case, the survival of the people involved in the important
relationships occur in external, bureaucratic, impersonal organizations. The husband and wife
are really dependent on pleasing their boss, not each other. Since the kids don't have to work with their
parents, neither party has to understand the other. It's a very modern complaint, one that I can attest to,
that your family doesn't understand you. I think a very modern feeling is not being understood.
Like, you wear lots of different masks for different situations. You wear a mask for your boss, for your
wife, for your children. You compartmentalize your life, but none of it's really you. In the pre-industrial
world, you just lived, worked, and did everything with your local community. The only comparable group
were servants or slaves. Everyone in your local community knew you, and there was more of a concept
of the flaws implicit in human nature. Keep in mind, our society's conception of human nature isn't
accurate. From looking at both ancient wisdom and modern studies, humans tend to underprioritize
material wealth or comfort for happiness, and overprioritize interpersonal relationships,
community, and religion. This is why historic societies lived in poverty, as do people in the third
world do today, but they can be happy. Thus, the weakening of all this stuff isn't a side effect,
it's the main course. You're creating this silent gnawing pain inside the modern world, something
which is so personal you'll never get people to talk about it, but which is secretly killing society
slowly. There are two depressing things about the industrial revolution which have negative social
effects, those being scale and standardization. For a symbol of how these operate, let's use the
example of an old-style factory. You know the kind that Henry Ford made, in which every person had a
job of attaching a little bit to a car. There was a French author of the time who wrote,
Imagine the life of someone whose entire life is to put the screw on that bolt. In the pre-industrial
world, you had a concept of the pride of craftsmanship, and you literally knew the person you were making
the cart or the axe for. Certain eras of history end up naturally selecting for certain traits.
For the industrial revolution, it's those two traits being scale and standardization,
in that the societies which resulted in standardizing a process or increasing the size
were able to crush those who weren't. For example, family farms are no longer the way most crops are
grown in America, given giant agricultural empires using industrial-level equipment and owning
thousands of acres naturally outcompete them. This is a process which we've seen play out over the last
lifetime, in which in 1920, 90% of Americans were either self-employed or worked at a small company.
Meanwhile, in 1990, 90% of Americans were employees. Today, only 10% of Americans are self-employed
or employers, while one-third work in the gig economy. So it has gotten better. One of the
interesting themes I've seen reading psychological books and an idea Kaczynski put a lot of thought into,
is that humans will sacrifice wealth for freedom and autonomy. It feels weird to call medieval peasants
free, given in many ways they were significantly less free than we are today. And I do really want
to stress that this pre-industrial social order is not utopian, and it feels silly to call the
pre-industrial world utopian, but in a lot of these societies, your entire life was dictated by your
family shame, or by very stringent moral codes. And with all of this being said though, in critical
ways, pre-industrial societies were more free than we are today. There wasn't a concept of having a boss
who would watch over you all day as you worked, a regulatory system, rules of conduct, and all that
stuff. Once you study pre-industrial anthropology, you find that people just lived their lives. There wasn't a
sharp separation between work, family, religion, community, government, or the nation. No concept
of working a nine-to-five. In the pre-industrial world, there was no concept of being employed.
A lord or master craftsman would have servants or apprentices. Given they lived with their boss,
there was more of a concept for responsibility for their lives as people, not just employees.
The thing is that they existed to perform tasks. The servants or apprentices lived with the lord
and did what needed to be done, and then just went back to living their lives. Work in the pre-industrial
world was largely seasonal, with a few months of heavy work and then months of doing nothing.
Whether or not people worked more hours than today in the pre-industrial world is complicated and varies
massively based off time period and region, as I explain in this text wall. Furthermore, for the
apprentices and servants, that wasn't expected to just be your life. Those were things you did when
you were young, which you then grew out of. An apprentice to a craftsman would later become
a master craftsman, often even inheriting the business. There was a huge social crisis in early
19th century England when you had this whole social class of people who ended up working in factories
for their whole lives as employees. This was seen as unnatural. There was an attitude that an employee
wasn't a real man and thus had no real right to get married. A lot of the discourse around Luddites
and Marxism during early industrialization was due to the social turmoil the industrial revolution did
to the traditional self-employed social structure. The modern school system was explicitly designed
to break people's will to make them easier industrial employees. We have loads of historic records of
how difficult it was to get pre-industrial farmers to acclimate to modern work. They would show up for
work hours late whenever they wanted, take days off randomly, would refuse the work their bosses gave
them, would talk back to their boss, and everything like that. We literally have records of the founders
of the American school system around the turn of the 20th century literally saying their goal was
explicitly to do this. For more info, watch my video on this topic. Keep in mind we don't remember
anything we learn in school past let's say age 12 and none of it is used for adult life. The reason
we still have school is that the skill they're selecting for is ability to sit still, to work long
hours, compliance in the ability to memorize or regurgitate information, make mechanical calculations,
wake up early, and skills like that. Pre-industrial people would view school as incredibly strange,
and even tyrannical. Wait, you have strangers raise your kids, you tell them what to do without the
parent knowing? It's also mandatory that you go to school. A very interesting book I read, and in fact
one of the most interesting anthropological books I've ever read, is The History of Manners by Norbert
Elias, and it's about how manners have changed over western history from the middle ages onwards,
and it shows a lot of really interesting underlying points. An example of it is that people in the
middle ages would cut up animal carcasses in front of their friends before eating them, or knights would
write poetry about how much they loved the act of killing, or friends and family would have sex in
front of each other, and it was a society with no sense of privacy, and things that would be
completely disgusting in our society were seen as normal. And the reasoning he gives is that as
society got more complicated, with more interconnected parts, we don't want to see people we don't know
do very private things. And that makes sense being the other side of Kazinsky's thesis of over-socialization.
It feels very strange to me that I'm talking up the pre-industrial world this much, given there are
very, very obvious negatives to the pre-industrial world. Firstly, on a daily basis I try to be
grateful for the material comforts which our era of history gives us. Infinite food, incredible medicine,
rapid transportation, great entertainment, birth control, political freedom, air conditioning, infinite
free learning. There are so many incredible benefits to our era that once you mention all of them,
criticizing it feels insane. However, at the same time you look into the soul of our society and you
find something that's very, very sick. If you don't see it, it's difficult to explain to you, but for
those who do see it, it's overwhelming. We can talk all day about how wealthy our society is, but it's also
clear that something is very, very wrong. What the lesson here is that wealth is nowhere near the
most important thing for happiness. Once you're out of poverty, wealth and happiness statistically
have basically nothing to do with each other. I was having a conversation with my manager. We were
talking about people we knew who were hyper-woke and asked us if Texans, the state I live in, feel guilt
for using air conditioning all year. What I told them is that air conditioning in Texas is non-negotiable.
Without it, there would be an immediate migration back to the Rust Belt, which is where I'm from.
Then I kept talking with my manager about the silly things climate change people push for,
like the deindustrialization of agriculture or ending gas-guzzling cars. Europe is literally pushing
for deindustrialization and degrowth. Both of which, if pushed, would literally be mass extinction events.
To get rid of modern agriculture today would be the death of billions of people.
Meanwhile, they won't look at real issues pushing climate change. For example, being China or India
installing another 100 coal power plants, and the real solution which is nuclear energy.
Then my manager and I reached the same conclusion. The reason they were pushing for this stuff is that
they wanted suicide. I've said in so many previous videos that the aim of the modern left is explicitly
suicide. They want the end of Western civilization, whiteness, the industrial revolution. Let's take
them at face value, which they literally tell us to do. The reality is that the psychological pressures
of the industrial revolution are so great that people can't bear them. Thus the societies which
have had industrialization the longest, like Northwest Europe or the Northeastern US,
are the areas attempting to commit suicide the most. Keep in mind, we're the exact same crazy monkeys
as who were living in tribal communities of 100 people hunting mammoths 100,000 years ago. Could
we really expect them to make the jump we did with the industrial revolution without some issues?
I think what's going on is the nihilism, dehumanization, atomization of modernity is a lot more damaging
than anyone realizes. I think as a society we're in denial since it hurts so badly. I frequently ask
people I know, let's say you're dying in a ditch now, what do you have to live for? I had a moment
when I was suicidal as a teenager and I had that realization. For me it was honor and my own pride as a
man. Something that my parents and culture had imprinted on me at a young age. I realized that
was something I could live for, where if everything else in my life went wrong, I would still have that.
Let me explain it this way. Our ruling class, or the bi-coastal college-educated globalist
managerial elite, constantly shit on the Victorians as being repressed and a cold society. In general,
when someone or some group isn't psychologically stable, you can look to their projections to figure
out what their own insecurities are. I know a lot about the Victorians. Repressed or cold is not
the right word for them. If you look at romanticism, the letters they would write to each other, or even
their view of history, it's very emotional, very dramatic, and they were very expressive. Yes, for
sex this is a very prude society, but keep in mind there is a lot of hypocrisy going on where there was
a tremendous amount of prostitution and porn as well. Meanwhile, for our ruling class, they are very
repressed. Repression is separation from our natural human urges. For example, being polyamorous
and seeing your girl get railed by another man is very repressed and not liberating, since you are
fighting your natural biological urges of masculine protectiveness. Hating your country is repressed,
since you are biologically wired to love your own people. Being a hyper-rationalistic redditor is
repressed, given we're naturally wired to use magical and religious thinking. I'm not saying these things are
good or bad, but merely what our nature is. Our ruling class competes over how malleable
and compliant they are. They compete over how much they can submit to authority. This is since
in the bureaucratic industrial system, your ability to submit to the machine determines your social value.
This is why we're such a feminine society, in which telling people no is taboo, in which we accept
absurdities like that men are women, that the nation shouldn't exist, or that we should print
infinite money. The ruling class earned in competitive virtue signaling contest to demonstrate
how servile to the machine they are. Kaczynski wrote one of the best criticisms of the left that
I have ever read. His criticism of leftism is so brilliant that it's easily become one of the top
10 most paradigm-building things I've ever seen. He said that the left is a resentful reaction to the
over-socialization of modernity. That the left is a power fantasy of having total power over absolutely
everything in society. That the reason they don't have a plan for what the dictatorship of the
proletariat would look like is that the endpoint is to get a dictatorship itself. I'm going to talk
about this more in the video on the anthropology of the left, which I will write very soon. However,
Kaczynski repeatedly keeps on crapping on the left in the most insightful ways I have ever seen.
The great irony for the left is that they simultaneously push for contradictory psychological drives.
Firstly, they seek to push over-socialization even further, in that they want to break human nature.
The left wants to remove all animal aspects of humanity, whether sexual or family bonds,
ethnicity, religion, martial values, honor, freedom, and the like, to be subliminated into the state.
I have frequently said in previous videos that a society in collapse will push its worst trait even
further. While at the same time the left pushes for total liberation from any standards or responsibility,
they also simultaneously want total power with no responsibility, which in itself is an oxymoron.
They also push for the collapse of modern civilization and industrialization. At the same time,
they want a fully automated space communist civilization. The problem is that nothing the left
says makes sense as a coherent strategy, and it never has. It's a psychologically unhealthy person
rebelling against conditions which they didn't evolve for. What I think happened is that through
studies and ancient wisdom, women are more dependent upon community and religion than men are. Thus,
women with the removal of those pre-industrial stabilizers rebelled against the society through
leftism without actually understanding the actual psychological drivers of what was happening.
They could sense the cold impersonality, nihilism, soullessness, and loneliness of modernity,
and tried to solve it in the female way of, we should just love each other and take care of everyone.
When that didn't work, they begged to have the system burned down due to racism, or climate change,
or whatever. Part 3. Yes, and...
Okay, we've gotten this far. I think a lot of people, including myself, could find themselves agreeing with
Kaczynski up to this point. I think his explanations for the flaws of industrial civilization are
brilliant and original. I frankly find few other authors who have covered this in any kind of way,
although it's clear that the Unabomber was drawing influence from Jacques Ellul and Lewis Mumford.
However, the thing that I myself, and I would say most sane people, object to is what Kaczynski recommended
after, and in fact, what he actually did. He says towards the end of his manifesto, which is pretty
short and it's free online so I'd recommend you folks read it after, is that industrial civilization
will go in two separate directions on its current trajectory. He said that the 21st century would
be the decision point for this, and that choices would be made which would change said trajectory in
that time frame. The first would be that the psychological pressures of modernity would be great
enough that it would collapse naturally. He said this would be promulgated by mental health issues,
collapsing birth rates, rising crime, collapsing standards of conduct, and that sort of thing.
You could very easily see wokeness or the collapsing birth rates as a form of this. A collective social
just giving up. A sense that there's not really a point anymore. As long-time viewers of the channel
would know, I agree with him. I have made so many previous videos talking about the global crisis that the
planet will face in the 21st century. You can call it so many things between the population crash,
the psychological black death, mouse utopia, the secular cycle, the crisis of the 21st century,
the end of the Pax Americana. All of these add up to the realization that there is an attempt to put
into words what is really an enormous historic crisis which must occur like an avalanche that's about
to crash upon us and which we will only understand after it's happened. However, the Unabomber's
second scenario, the one which terrified both himself and I, is also on the table. With genetic
engineering, AI, and other technologies that we are gradually changing human nature in order to deal
with the compliance required by the industrial system, we effectively turn into soulless hive creatures
like ants or termites. Keep in mind we already use genetic engineering on animals so the technology's
already been used for decades. This is a lot like the terrifying scenario Yuval Noah Harari lays out in
Homo Deus. Something Kaczynski brings up is that this might not even be accomplished by a cruel top-down
authoritarian government which people would expect. Instead, let's say with a humane social democracy that
starts using genetic engineering to help people with physical illness. Then they start using it to
remove mental illnesses like depression, but the problem with that is that by doing this you're
removing the free thinkers or the people with independent spirits or who are sick in a system
which is designed to naturally make people sick. The sensitive are those who are hurt the most by
modernity. After a couple generations, what would be left of the human character? You would,
after a small amount of time, hit either Brave New World or 1984. We're already seeing some of the
foreshadowing for this. An example in Canada being the assisted suicide, even for mental health issues.
It wouldn't take much for them to say political opposition are naturally mentally ill, much like
what occurred in the Soviet Union, and say that they need to be put down for their own good.
Alternately, with the World Economic Forum they talk about degrowth and Yuval Noah Harari called half of the
population useless eaters. What these types of people publicly aim for is using automation and
genetic engineering to crush dissent. I mean construct a utopia. I'm literally going to say this is all
stuff that they're publicly saying that they're doing now. I really want to stress this. The thing
that makes humanity beautiful is our individuality. It's our inner soul, our ability to sense the world
and feel pain. When you remove that, we've lost the game of human history. Say goodbye to literally
everything you care about. It's the equivalent to Mordor winning in Lord of the Rings. The world
these kinds of people would make would turn humans into cogs or machines, not even animals. The human
spirit buckles under tyranny, which is why evil must lose inevitably. With all this being said, what
happens when you change the human character so it no longer buckles like that? It's in no way a coincidence
that all the great artistic pieces of the industrial world, whether Star Wars, Lord of the Rings,
Fight Club, American Beauty, Princess Mononoke, The Matrix, and so many more, are the fight against a giant
depersonalizing force so that the human soul can survive. I hope you folks understand why I don't
think the Unabomber was crazy. The calculation he's making from his perspective is completely rational.
I frankly would have done something similar if I was him, but different in one important way. I would
have known in normal circumstances no one would read this. One of the great points Kaczynski makes
is that even though we have a legal freedom of press with the big news stations that control everything,
and so the reality is that there is mass control over information dissemination in a way that didn't
exist 200 years ago. To be fair, one of the biggest things this channel does is trawl for obscure but
brilliant 20th century authors that were completely forgotten by history. If he wasn't a terrorist,
I would probably have never heard of Kaczynski's work even though my job is looking for forgotten,
smart authors since he wasn't operating in my chosen field of history or anthropology. If I were Kaczynski,
I would try to do something crazy to get people's attention. I would probably start making hyper-controversial
statements, maybe throw a huge raffle. With all that being said, I'm not sure any of that would
actually work. Where I and I think most other people differ from him is in his acts of terrorism.
At the end of his manifesto, he says that we should forcibly try to destroy the manufacturing ability
of industrial civilization, literally fomenting hatred of technology itself and attacking those
who work in the field. The thing though is that this is a terrible strategy. If he asked me,
I would tell him that would only result in invalidating his cause and turning the entire
ideals of the organization into a social taboo. It would work if the general public disliked
technology more, but the reality is that the average person loves the conveniences of modern
technology and never wants to part with them. I think Kaczynski was in a tremendous amount of
pain psychologically and needed an easy or quick solution. He was feeling powerless and so tried to
do the most direct route. I also get the sense he was a man who reached a point where he didn't
really care much whether he lived or died. I don't approve of his terrorist activities, but I will
point out that he won. He's gotten to the point where his ideas are very widely circulated. Hell,
we're currently talking about them on this channel and most of you know who he is. If the struggle of the
21st century is as close as he believed it would be, he might actually have indirectly changed the
tide of the conflict. I don't think Kaczynski, if he saw the results of what his actions would be,
would have been disappointed with the result. It's comparable to how I've said before that Al-Qaeda
won 9-11. There's a book called The Grace of Kings, which is one of my favorite fiction books ever,
about a fantasy version of Chinese history. The title of the book relates to a faction betraying
a treaty with another faction in order to unify the country. The meaning of The Grace of Kings is
that in the grand scheme of things, the character did the right thing by breaking the treaty, which
then allowed the unification of the continent. When all is said and done, are the three lives Kaczynski
killed worth changing history for? Only time will tell, but this line of thinking eventually ends up
with Hitler and Stalin when pushed to its natural conclusion. In these sorts of things, I can see
why traditional world religions tell people to stop worrying and to trust God instead. In that,
right when Kaczynski committed these crimes, a new technological discovery came out which completely
changed the calculus on this entire issue. This is one of the best and worst parts of modernity,
in that changes occur so rapidly that you have no idea what the world will look like even 30 years
from now. That discovery, one which radically pushed disunity, was the internet. No one really
thinks through the geopolitical ramifications of the internet. However, it's going to become an
absolute game changer. When the Unabomber was writing, the world was at peak pro-centralization.
Due to the technologies, sheer scale was very efficient. The internet flips the entire calculus,
in that rather than a single company making products, it's cheaper to get it off Etsy,
or rather than working with a traditional taxi company, you use Uber instead. Rather than
outsourcing to a university, you're learning through YouTube. The internet has potential,
if used correctly, to turn everything the Unabomber said on its head. The internet could
allow the ruralization of society, the breakdown of top-down government authoritarianism, organic social
operation and self-employment. The rise in the gig economy, as well as digital replacements for legacy
institutions, is literally just proving all of this. The internet also has the potential to go
into other directions in which the government can use it to monitor the entire population
for their whole lives. I'm going to do something I normally don't and shill crypto. If we don't want
the internet to devolve into authoritarianism, we have to develop an encrypted, secretive,
private, blockchain-based internet which doesn't allow data oppression. And the next generation,
we need to have an active decision to keep the internet and our societies by extension free.
Biology does a lot of this stuff around this topic and has built a movement around making sure
hierarchical authorities can't use the internet to control people. If you're interested, check it out.
We also need to make an active decision that we want to be the sort of society which values the human
soul, that we respect and love our own humanity even with its flaws, that we aren't willing to trade
our souls for money which will realistically accumulate to the elites. You know, this stuff
used to depress me. I went through a few-year period of legitimate grieving, of realizing I didn't live
in the Simpsons or John Hughes America I thought I would. The thing is that politics at this level
affects everything in your life, whether work, romantic options, religion, political, or social views.
Then I realized I prefer this since it allows me to go hard and do cool stuff. What's the point of
living if you're not going hard?
