So what we're talking about really is civilizational collapse.
So we're not going to burn the technology. We need to delay it. You know, just we can't be
raising kids on this stuff. This stuff is not suitable for children. For 12, 13, 14, 15 year
olds? No, no. Just get rid of all of it. What we're doing to kids in preventing them from
developing executive function is going to hurt them for the rest of their lives. So I think we
will see a permanent effect on Gen Z. That's a tragedy, John. Oh, this is the
greatest destruction of human capital in human history.
Jonathan, hi. It has been a long time us trying to make this happen. You are the author of some
of our absolutely favorite books, which really describe a lot of what's happening in modern
society. Your latest one, The Anxious Generation, is talking about something that is crucial to
the future, I think. Tell us, what do you see, why you wrote it, what are your concerns, and what are
some of the solutions? Sure. Well, first, Constantine and Francis, thanks so much for
having me on. Yes, I've blown you off for years, but I've blown off everybody for years because it's
like, how do you get time to write a book when you have a full life? And so I had to be very rude to
everyone, but here's my baby. It came out. Now, what is it? In a sense, it's a follow-on to The
Calling the American Mind in that, in that book, Greg Lukianoff and I talked about how something really
weird happened. In 2014 or so, 2013, 2014, Greg first noticed it, and it felt to me kind of like
a glitch in the matrix, like something changed right around 2014. We saw it in college students.
They were very different than they were in 2012, and that's where you start getting the shout-downs
and the fragility and the claims about we have to stop this person, not because they're unjust,
but because of somebody's mental health. All that was new. And at first, we thought it was something
about college students. And then we talked in The Coddling about overprotection. We have a lot on
the importance of free play, being unsupervised, so we have a whole part of the story there.
And we have just like three paragraphs of speculation that, well, you know, social media might have
contributed to this too because the timing is right. And if you're born in 1996, beginning of Gen Z,
you got Facebook when you were a kid and Instagram when you were going through puberty,
so the timing is right, but we don't know. The data's not clear. So that was 2017 that we wrote
that book. And then things just get worse and worse on university campuses, but also it becomes clear
it's not just college students. It becomes very, very clear it's everyone. It's everyone born after
1996. And especially once it became clear that it wasn't just the U.S. It was exactly the same in Canada,
the UK, Australia. We have more recent data. It's the Nordic countries as well. In all of them,
we see a very sudden shift in the early 2010s. It really is like a glitch in the matrix.
And I argue in the book here that what it is, is there was a great rewiring of childhood that
happened in those years. In 2010, almost all kids had a flip phone. The iPhone was just coming in,
but it wasn't that popular. There weren't that many apps. Social media wasn't on it. So in 2010,
almost all kids have a flip phone or other dumb phone. There's no front-facing camera. There's no
high-speed internet. You have to pay for every text you send. So you can't spend your whole life.
In 2010, teenagers are not spending their whole life on their phones. They're using it as a tool
to connect and get together later. That's fine. That's normal childhood.
By 2015, everyone's got a smartphone, front-facing camera, Instagram on the phone. We've got a lot
of high-speed internet. You don't pay for texts anymore. So now, and there's so much going on,
so the phone now becomes an experience blocker. And all the experiences that a kid needs,
blocked out by this. That's why kids born after 1996 or after 1995 are just really different from
those born just a few years earlier, on average. Obviously there are exceptions, but on average,
that's what the book is about. How did we create this anxious generation? And then what do we do now?
And I suppose the question is, given that all of this technology is here, we're not going to be
able to Luddite our way out of it. We're not going to be able to smash them to pieces and whatever. So
I guess it's a question of how do we manage this? How do we deal with the reality of modern technology?
Which, by the way, seems to me to be only going to be accelerating from here.
That's right. So I have a whole email inbox where I send, every day I get emails from somebody who
has an app or a website or something that's going to address the problem. And I don't even read them
anymore. I just send them to this inbox and maybe someday someone will look at them. I've come to
the opinion that there is no way to make the 9 or 10 hours a day that kids are spending on their phones,
there is no way to make that nicer and safer. We're not going to smash the technology, but you know what?
We can delay it. When cars came out, they were amazing and a lot of people died in them. A lot
of children died in them. And eventually, we kind of realized we need safety features in the car. And
you know what? You have to be 16 to drive. We're not going to let a 12-year-old drive a car.
And I think the same thing, we're going to come to that realization about social media in particular.
Possibly smartphones. I just got back from the UK and all the talk is, let's ban smartphones. Let's
not let kids under 14 own a smartphone or not let them be sold. As an American, I'm not very fond of
bans. But I think the norm needs to be, you know what? We're biological creatures. We're mammals. We
have an evolutionary program called childhood. We have to let that unfold. Kids have to spend enormous
amounts of time playing with each other, hanging out, teasing each other, unsupervised. No adult
coming and saying, no, no, no, don't say that. Oh, no, you go sit and look. Just let them work it out.
Obviously, there are cases of bullying. We have to attend to that. But other than those limited cases,
let kids work it out. Let them get most of the way through puberty. This is a key idea in the book.
I really came to see that puberty is this incredibly important period where the whole brain is rewiring from
the child form to the adult form. And it happens in stages from back to front, more or less. The
last part to rewire is the prefrontal cortex. And this is happening around 13 to 16 in that period.
And it continues on to 25. But it's completely insane that when puberty starts, which is around
11 or 12 for girls and around 13 or 14 for boys, when puberty starts is basically when we give them
a phone and say, how about no more real world experience? How about you spend 10 hours a day on this
thing? And your brain isn't going to... I mean, neural rewiring is this incredibly complex dance.
And just as if we gave our kids alcohol every hour, that would disrupt neural growth. Well, I would say
giving them four hours a day of video games for the boys or five hours a day of video games for the
girls, it's going to disrupt neural growth. You know, and this is anecdotal, but I was a teacher
for many years and everyone's going to drink because it's now become a hack comment on this podcast for me.
But one of the things that I noticed, because I was a drama teacher and a lot of drama teaching
in the UK is you give children a set of stimulus and then they create their own plays, improvised
plays around the stimulus. And I remember talking with the drama teachers halfway into my career and
we were going, I think kids are becoming less imaginative. What year was this around?
What? This was around 2015, 2016. And we started to notice that, that the quality of work that the
kids were doing was degrading. There's a lot going on there. The one thing I can say with some confidence
is the fragmentation of attention. This is very general. The ability... So the one thing the
prefrontal cortex does is called executive function. It's the ability to make a plan, say, you know, like,
like this morning I said, okay, I want to, I would need to be here at 930. And I thought about the
different methods and I made a plan and then I stuck to the plan because I have a normal prefrontal
cortex. And if you disrupt that, if you're constantly in the early teen years, if you're
constantly being divided, you have all kinds of stuff coming in, that part doesn't develop as well.
So this is one of the most common comments we hear about Gen Z is that it's very difficult for them to
stay on task. In fact, their brains have become accustomed to such a constant incoming stream of
information that a lot of them have trouble watching a video because it's not enough stimulation.
So they do this thing, there'll be, and people have sent me these things, there's like a video of
me giving a talk and underneath it is a video of a video game going on. They need two things at once.
Where if they're at the computer, they need the phone as well. And so this is inhuman. This is,
this is what we're doing to kids in preventing them from developing executive function is going
to hurt them for the rest of their lives. So that's a very general comment. Now as for creativity,
that's quite possible. I don't have, I haven't studied that. I don't have like a specific mechanism,
but in general, you know, creativity requires you take in a lot of stuff and you put out stuff and then
you get criticism. So you've got to have this back and forth with the world to be creative.
But, but now that kids are basically taking in gigabyte, I mean, you know, 10, 50 times as much
stuff as we did when we were young, the stuff is coming and not a lot is coming out. And they're
not doing a lot of writing. They're not, they're, you know, they're not writing books. They're not
starting companies even. They're, they're, they're taking in so much stuff. So I'm guessing,
I'm speculating, but that might be part of why you'd see a reduction in creative production.
And what was interesting as well is that towards the end of my time in education,
I noticed that there were far more arguments. There were far more fights between kids because
their social skills had diminished. So they couldn't find a way to negotiate conflict.
That's right.
And people were like, oh, it's because they're spoiled. And I was like, I don't think it is.
I genuinely don't think they know how to communicate effectively.
That's right. So what, you know, we, we need to develop one-on-one communication skills. And
something I, you know, I realized in writing the book is I, I had to deal with this question of,
well, you know, aren't they playing online? Isn't that just as good? Aren't they socializing online?
Like what about a kid who's isolated here? He has lots of friends. Isn't that just as good?
And what I realized in writing the book is no, actually there are four ways in which
online communication, online interaction are, are not as good or very different.
So the first is that real life is embodied and just what we're doing now, just like the rules of,
you know, like you guys are looking straight at me because I'm talking, but if I were just to look
straight at you while I was talking, that would be kind of, it's kind of weird because like,
you know, you don't do that. So you have to work out rules of eye contact and we're all
communicating with our heads. It's not just our mouths. It's like our head movements are very important.
So anyway, there's all these nonverbal channels online. You get emojis and you get a lot of
uncertainty. You say something, you don't know how it landed and you're anxious until they respond.
So it's embodied. Real life is synchronous. Right now we have instant, really rapid back and forth.
And now on a, you know, on a zoom call or in some video games, you have that. So some parts of the
virtual world are synchronous, but most are not it's text-based. You know, I, I say something,
you know, you misinterpret it and then you tell other people and we, we, we lose that, that connection.
The third is that real life interactions are mostly one-to-one or in this case, one to two,
one to a few, you hang out with a group of friends. But once it becomes like a group text
where a kid is posting and there's, you know, 80 kids, like the whole class is on this group text,
it's not playful anymore. It's performative and it's anxiety provoking because you make one misstep
and your reputation is trash. So it's scary. It's anxiety provoking. And then the final one
is that real life communities in general are durable. Whereas online communities are evanescent,
you know, maybe there's, you know, 500 people in a group and most will be gone by tomorrow.
Almost nobody's going to be there a year from now. So kids need to be rooted in permanent
communities. This is part of the human developmental plan. And in the online world, they just dip their
toe into hundreds of little things. This I think is one of the major reasons why the thing that happens
in 2012. It's not just anxiety shooting up. It's not just depression shooting up.
It's the sense of meaninglessness. There's all these really sad questions on these surveys.
Sometimes I feel like my life has no meaning. Sometimes I think I'm no good at all.
There's these really sad questions. And until 2012, the rates of agreement among American high school
kids were very, very low. And then all of a sudden, right around 2012, as they move their lives
onto the girls' social media, the boys' more video games, as they move their lives into the virtual
world, they're lonely and they have a sense of meaninglessness. They're not rooted in anything.
So this is why I call it the great rewiring of childhood. And it's become something inhuman,
and we have to roll it back.
Just to finish this train of thought with my experiences, one thing, again, this is anecdotal,
but still, I think it's important. So I was in high school, I qualified as a secondary school
teacher in 2008. And I remember talking to the teachers, and they were saying to me,
you know what, Francis, bullying, because I always worked in rough, tough schools, they were like,
you know, this is, these are deprived kids, you know, it's always been a tough environment.
But the bullying since Facebook, and I'm not even talking about Instagram or any of the others,
when Facebook came into this school, the bullying got so much worse. And to take your point,
I remember when I was a form tutor being handed printouts from parents of messages these kids
were sending to each other. It was vile, utterly, utterly vile. And you just go, this is incentivizing
this type of behavior, because there is that, you know, you can just say these things, and you know
there's going to be little to no pushback. That's right, that's right. And you say them to get the
prestige where you'd never say them directly to the kid face to face for a lot of them. So, you know,
what we call middle school in the United States, grades six, seven, and eight, you know, roughly
ages 11 to 13. This is when bullying peaks, around seventh grade is when bullying peaks.
And these are very different, difficult developmental years, especially for girls,
their bodies are changing, they're insecure, they're being judged by their looks, by their
breast size, but you know, it's such a difficult time for girls. And that's right when we introduce
this crazy thing, where everyone can say anything about anyone, often anonymously, and you create,
I mean, you know, you take all the difficulties of adolescence, especially for girls, and you
multiply them by 10. Oh, and then let's add in strangers, you can talk to strangers without
your parents knowing. And, you know, with all these platforms, they start off lovely, they start off fun,
they start off playful. But any system you create, any ecosystem you create, unless you have an
incredibly elaborate, evolving immune system, any systems can be taken over by parasites, viruses,
and exploiters. And so, for example, I'm just so horrified, you know, one thing I learned about
when I was in the UK is the rapid growth of sextortion. You know, I'd heard about it for years,
but apparently there's a Nigerian gang, the Yahoo boys. And, you know, the trick, you know,
that strangers can talk to your kids, and they do this to boys, because boys are stupid enough
sometimes to send a naked photo. If a beautiful girl says, let's swap photos, and she's been flirting
with them for a couple of days, boys are stupid enough, or gullible enough, or desperate enough to
do it. And the instant they send that photo, this person in the criminal gang says, now I've got
everything I need to ruin your life, you have 30 minutes to send me $500, where I will ruin
your life, I know all your contacts, I'm going to send this photo to everyone, I know where you live.
And so, I mean, this is the idea that we're exposing boys to predators, who not only can
sextort them, but I read in one recent report, the FBI has linked 22 suicides of boys just to
sextortion, which means there's probably hundreds of them, which means there are tens of thousands
who are being sextorted and having their lives ruined. So the idea that in the most vulnerable,
difficult transition from child to adult, we say, how about if you could all say things about anyone,
and you can be exploited by predators, and you get these TikTok challenges urging you to do stupid
things like kick people's legs out while they're jumping so they fall on their head. I mean,
crazy, crazy stuff. So we're not going to burn the technology, but we need to delay it. You know,
just we can't be raising kids on this stuff. This stuff is not suitable for children.
And John, one of the things that is the origin story of trigonometry is our concern about
people being prevented from speaking their mind, restriction of speech. And also, it's clear from
the way that social media operates that I worry about AI as well in the sense that AI is learning
about human beings from social media effectively and from online communication, which we all know is
not how people actually are. It's how people actually communicate. And the reason is, one of the reasons
is what the word you used already, which is performative. So is there a way to make online communication
more human? Well, I think the telephone did an amazing job of that. When the telephone came in,
it connected everyone in a good way. And I'm sure there were people at the time who had some objection,
but overall, we've seen the telephone as a boom when you connect people directly. And I think when
Facebook first came out, many people saw it as a boom, there was no newsfeed. It was just, here's
my page, I can put up pictures, and I connect, you're my friend, I connect to you. So in theory,
social media could be beneficial. But they all, especially once Facebook developed the advertising
driven business model, where now it's not about not giving you a platform by which you can talk with
your friends. It's now about how do I keep you, how do I keep your eyes on the sites that I can
sell more ads to my customers who are the advertisers, the users are not the customers.
So, so I think, so, you know, again, I get all the, everyone has an idea for how to do a better
online form of interaction, and I'm so sick of it. So I say, you know, maybe for over 18s, yeah,
for adults, let's have some better platforms drive out the bad platforms. But you know what,
for 12, 13, 14, 15 year olds, no, no, just get rid of all of it, get rid of all of it.
What we have to do is give kids back normal human childhood. So, so very important point I'm trying
to make to parents, everyone's focuses on the phone stuff. You can't just take away the phones and the
iPads and all the technology from your, you know, six, seven, eight, nine, 10, 11, 12 year olds. You
have to give them back something else, which is play. You know, I'm sure you, okay, fond memories,
go back to when you're eight, nine, 10. Think of a fond memory, say it. What do you see yourself doing?
Granddad's farm playing, swimming in the river.
With granddad? Who are you with?
No, with cousins.
Right, you know, other kids.
Yeah, that's right. And you're, and this is exciting. It's thrilling. You take risks,
you know, you figure how to swing, you know, you, you know, you throw a vine or a rope and you swing
and you take risks and you might get hurt. That turns out to be really important. It's very important
that kids, kids need to sort of size up the risk and each one has to adjust it to the level that he
needs that day. And if you let kids do that, they will occasionally get hurt. But at the end of the
process, they really can judge risk. What we did beginning in the nineties, because the backstory here,
it's not just about the phones. The backstory is we, we got rid of the play-based childhood.
In America, we freaked out about child abduction, but even in the UK where you didn't have much of
it, you still freaked out and lost trust in each other and got hyper-concerned about traffic and
said, no, we're not letting our kids out. So, so kids, what kids need is play-based childhood.
That's what they had until the 1990s, early 2000s. And instead they, at the same time that we were
locking them up and saying, no, you can't go outside unsupervised. Oh, but here's a personal
computer and, you know, it has a dial-up modem and, and look, you can play video games and,
oh, you can talk to your friends. And so in the nineties and early two thousands, kids were shifting
over to virtual interactions. Their mental health didn't collapse then actually. It was actually
pretty stable in the nineties, especially in the 2000, pretty stable.
It's only once they make the jump to, from flip phones to smartphones, that's when you go from
playing a bunch of video games at home on the family computer to, I have the entire internet
with me all the time. And I can be flirting with strangers who claim to be sexy women. You know,
you get the craziness once you get this all the time. That's why 2010 to 2015, that's the key
period when everything collapses. And John, one of the things that I think is inevitably
something we have to be honest about is even if right now we did everything that you're saying,
we still have one, maybe two generations who are just, who've been raised in this way and there's
nothing that can be done about it. So, so two points on different sides. One,
I do suspect because puberty is such a crucial period of brain rewiring, I do expect that the, that Gen Z will
be less than it could be permanently. I think that Gen Z is not, you know, even if we look at them in
30 or 40 years, my prediction is they'll be less successful than they would have been if they'd had
normal human childhoods. So I think we will see a permanent effect on Gen Z.
But that's a, that's a tragedy, John.
Oh, this is the greatest destruction of human capital in human history.
We've taken an entire generation globally, certainly the, I don't have any data from the developing world,
but in the developed countries, we've taken entire generation, we've taken away what they need
biologically to, to develop with, you know, risk exposure, hanging out time. We've taken all that
away and given them something unnatural. So yes, this is, I believe the greatest destruction of human
capital in human history. I could be wrong. I'm making an argument that this is what has happened.
But now on the positive side, on the positive side, even though there'll be a difference, you know,
I'm a social scientist. So, you know, if there's going to be an average difference, I'm going to
talk about and say, this is incredibly important. But it doesn't mean that each kid in Gen Z is
condemned to a life of anxiety, because the human brain is quite malleable up through 25. And even
after that, we can all learn new thinking patterns and new behavior patterns. And so what's most exciting
to me is the results I'm getting in my class at NYU. I teach a course called Flourishing.
It began as a course just for MBA students in 2014, like teaching them how to have a more flourishing
career. But once it became clear in 2019, just before COVID, that our undergrads are really
depressed, just like undergrads everywhere. And so I volunteered to convert the course over to a longer,
deeper course for undergraduate students. And so I limit it to sophomores. I want to get them pretty
early in their time at Stern, at NYU Stern. And so they're all about 19 years old. And the course,
the point of the course is to make them smarter, stronger, and more sociable. And smarter,
I show them that, you know what, since 2015, young people have had essentially zero attention. You
don't have any attention to do anything. It's all sucked up by your devices. So if you have no
attention, you really can't accomplish anything in life. Now, do you want that? Okay, none of you want
to. They're business students. They want to be successful. Say, okay, you have $100 of attention every
day. And you've given all of it away. So you have none to spend. Now, let's change that. Look at your
notifications. Look at how much time you spend on YouTube, on TikTok. One of my students was spending
six hours a day just watching TikTok, just TikTok. And then with all the other stuff, we're up to 10,
12, 14 hours a day. But they get amazing results. When they shut off almost all notifications,
I show them just shut off, you know, leave on Uber, and a few others where, you know, yes,
I give Uber permission to interrupt my attention to tell me your car will be here in three minutes.
Like, yes, that's worth doing. But, you know, do I give some newspaper permission to interrupt me to
say, you know, Prince Harry says this, or, you know, major weather pattern in Brazil? Like, no,
no, you know. So when I help them regain their attention, understand risk, understand that they
need to take risks. This is one thing that's so exciting to me is that Gen Z totally recognizes
the problem. They're not in denial. They want to take risks. They want to get, they want to grow.
And so if you lay out a path and you say, here's the challenge, and then they do it together. So it's
a very collective, collectivist generation more so than previously. But if a class of kids or if a group of
friends or if a school, if they do it together, they make amazing progress. Well, this is where I was
going with it. And you were excited by the idea of this being a more collectivist generation.
I have some questions about that. Yes. There's a dark side.
Well, quite. And more broadly, I guess where I was going is, even though I think what you were doing
clearly is magnificent and helping them. And I think with younger kids, there are conscious parents
who are trying to, you know, mitigate some of the consequences of this. I was sitting in a bar in
Florida the other day, talking to some guys next to me and they were saying, oh, you've got a two
year old. What are you doing? And I was sort of, well, he's not getting any screens because my wife
is a screen Nazi and I fully support her, you know? And this guy was saying, oh, really? That's
it. He seemed shocked. And he was like, oh, my 12 year old has been banned from TikTok for posting
videos of him fighting with other kids, you know? So I guess what I'm getting at is I'd be curious to hear,
given that I suspect the mass of these, this generation isn't going to be reeducated,
so to speak, in a Jonathan Haidt brilliant course. What are some of the social and societal
trends that we are likely to see, especially when inevitably these kids start hitting the workplaces
and start having influence and power and so on? What's going to happen then? I thought my generation
were bad. Millennials? Millennials, yeah. Jonathan's work reveals just how the deluge of information
available to us shapes our society. One of the key insights from Haidt's research is how this
information overload is presented and how it can profoundly impact mental health and our perceptions.
This is where understanding media narratives becomes crucial and where Ground News comes in.
Ground News is a powerful website and app that helps you navigate a sea of information. By
highlighting media bias and showing how different outlets cover the same news, you get a comprehensive
view of what's happening both at home and around the world. Go to ground.news slash trigonometry to
check them out. We rely on Ground News to stay informed and critically engaged. One of our favorite
features is the blind spot feed, which highlights stories disproportionately covered by one side of the
political spectrum. This helps us see what topics are emphasized or overlooked by different outlets.
Let's use Ground News right now to take a look at a story related to youth mental health,
as the US Senate recently passed a bipartisan bill to reform online child safety and prevent bullying
and harassment. Ground News shows that out of 142 sources, just 11 of them are on the right. Conversely,
31% of them are from left-leaning outlets, with the majority coming from sources in the center. Ground
News pulls together all of the sources on one page. And if we take a closer look at the headlines,
we can see how each side frames the story. The Washington Post, a left-leaning source, highlights
that this raises pressure on the House of Representatives to act on the bill, while the New
York Post, a right-leaning source, spotlights how this is landmark legislation. This kind of balanced
insight is crucial for cutting through the noise and understanding complex issues like the ones
Jonathan Haidt studies. If you go to ground.news slash trigonometry, you'll get 40% off their unlimited
access vantage plan, which unlocks all the features you see here and more. By subscribing, you're directly
supporting their mission to bring facts, transparency and trust back to the news in mission we at Trigonometry
proudly endorse. That site again is ground.news slash trigonometry. Don't miss out on this incredible tool to
help you stay informed and critically engaged with the news. But the millennials were different in
the way that every generation is different. So every generation has stereotypes of the one after them.
They're soft, they're self-involved. That's been true since about the 16th century. Once you get
modernity, you get rapid change. Each generation thinks the one behind it is defective. But that's
always been the case. What we have here is something very new. Gen Z is not just that they're different,
it's that they're really anxious, fragile, they have no attention to focus on things, and they're just not very
effective. And so I teach in a business school, I speak to a lot of people in business, and I always
ask them, you know, how are things going with your Gen Z employees? I've only once heard a good thing. It's
almost always like, oh my god. I mean, they're so anxious, and they're always taking days off, and they
don't take initiative on things, and they expect others to come and fix things. I mean, so Gen Z is not
integrated into the workforce well. None of this is their fault. This poor generation, they were the
first that were completely deprived of play, and then they were the first to go through puberty on
smartphones. And then just as they're coming out of high school or college, just as they're going
into the workforce, COVID hits. So this is a generation that just, they were just blocked and
blocked and blocked from developing skills that will make you effective in business or in life.
So there's no criticism of them here. There's sympathy. But it's not going well integrating into the
workplace. And let's see, what was the other part of your question? Well, I guess what I'm asking is,
what is going to be their impact on culture, politics, and everything else? Because people
who are highly anxious and all of the other things you list, I imagine the laws that they might want
to pass are going to be different to people who are resilient. I imagine the way that they interpret
existing laws is going to be different. I imagine, you know, you mentioned being a collective
generation. Like, what are they going to want? That's right. No, that's right. So one of the things I'm very
concerned about, I'm very concerned, I think you guys have talked about this too, is the difficulty
of having a large, diverse, secular society. Human groups, we evolved in fish infusion communities,
we're very good at coming together to fight another group, but once we reach a certain size,
we tend to split. Civilization is a way of having much, much larger groups, traditionally united by
shared gods, shared blood, and shared enemies. That's the human way. That's been true for, you know,
5,000 years. So you can have civilizations based on shared gods, shared blood, shared enemies,
and those can be very stable for many generations. But, you know, in the West, we develop these
liberal democracies. And as an American, I'd like to take credit. I mean, there are earlier democracies,
but I'll take credit for, you know, we are founding fathers. We're incredibly wise political
philosophers. They read history. They were amazing social psychologists. They knew that democracy is
unstable because people are passionate, and the people can't just rule themselves. You can't have direct
democracy, but let's come up with a system where you don't have direct democracy, but yet the people
can throw them out of power. The people ultimately can say, no, we don't like this. So they set up
this elaborate, like almost like an elaborate clock with, you know, counterweights and gears and pulleys.
And at the time, Ben Franklin said, he was asked, the famous line, he was asked, you know,
what kind of government have you given us? And he says, a republic, if you can keep it. Meaning,
if the people have sufficient virtue to keep this going, you can keep it. But if the people don't
have certain virtues, then this thing is going to fall apart. Now, the key to the American form of
government, I believe, is that it's been called the American experiment. And what that means is it's
an experiment in self-governance. So the idea was, can we govern ourselves without a king?
And the Europeans said, no, good luck. No one can do that. You need a king.
You need a potentate, some power. And we said, we're going to give it a try. And it was chaotic
at times, but we kept improving and we solved a lot of our problems. And Alexis de Tocqueville observed
in the 1830s when he traveled around America, he said, actually similar to what you and I were just
talking about before we started filming, that he said, you know, when there's a problem to be solved
in France, everyone waits for the king to do it. And in England, they wait for the local nobles to do
it. But in America, they form a committee, and they each put in a few dollars. And they say,
we're going to build this bridge over this river that we need, or we're going to build a school or
a hospital, whatever it is. So he admired this can-do spirit of Americans. And a key idea, which we
developed, Greg and I developed in the coddling, is in order to become self-governing as a nation,
you need citizens who can be self-governing in their lives. Citizens who can work out conflicts
without always going to the police or the courts. Citizens who can work out conflicts by themselves.
And all of us had childhoods where we were forced to become self-governing because there were no adult,
you know, in the afternoon or on weekends, you're out playing. So it's those conflicts on the
playground. It's, you know, you have a game and you say, well, here's the boundary. And someone
says, that was out of bounds. And you have to adjudicate, like, no, it wasn't. And how are we
going to, we want to keep the game going, so we've got to work it out. All that is essential stuff in
childhood to create self-governing individuals, which can allow you to have a self-governing republic.
What happens now? The kids are almost always supervised, so they don't get a chance to become
self-governing. Some people say, oh, well, you know, that's why video games are so important. It's the one
place where the kids aren't being supervised. Well, guess what? There are no conflicts on a video
game. There's no out of bounds. There's no adjudication. The platform does all of that.
All you do is control your player and have adventures, but they're not real risks. My son
jumps out of planes many times a day and stabs people and shoots people. And it's all, it's just,
you know, it's not exciting in the way that, I mean, I don't want to say it's exciting in real life,
but I'm just saying, growing up in the virtual world does not give you the ability to become
self-governing in the ways that we need. So I'm extremely afraid, that's a long-winded way of
getting back to your question. It's possible that we'll have a complete rupture in American history.
It's possible that Gen Z and later were deprived of the opportunity to develop the virtues that we've
always assumed would be there. Not that my, I'm late baby boomer, not that my generation did such a
great job. I mean, you know, Gen Z bears none of the blame for the mess that America's in now.
But I'm afraid that we have ill-prepared them to handle this mess. We're going to have a lot more,
we've already seen it. They've been raised with these ideas of microaggressions and trigger warnings.
So they think that speech is, many of them think that speech is violence. And Greg Lukianoff and
Fire have been charting this out. And I was doing also with Heterodox Academy, we charted out a lot
of this. Attitudes towards free speech are really changing rapidly in Gen Z. Because if, you know,
we were raised with sticks and stones will break my bones, but names will never harm me. Of course,
names do hurt. But this was a way of saying, you know what, I'm not going to let like, go ahead,
insult me, I'm not going to react. But the new thing is, if you say anything that I can in any way
interpret as a criticism of me or my group, you've committed an aggression, someone has to punish
you because you're hurting me. And this means we are stuck in endless, endless conflicts over
somebody said something. This is something I hear from business people too. Oh, you see it,
especially in progressive organizations, there have been a few articles written about the chaos
within politically progressive nonprofits, because it's just constant conflict over someone said
something. Like, can't we, you know, can't we do our work? The older people say like, no,
because somebody said something. So yes, I think we are going to see, we're going to see,
we're going to see a change in values and social abilities that may be incompatible with the American
form of democracy. Well, very much on that point, there was another thing you mentioned, and this is
something that I've been thinking about a lot. You said people can unite into civilization that's bigger
than, you know, the Dunbar number of 250 people or whatever, or 150. If they've got shared blood,
shared gods, shared enemies, I would argue we've got at best one of them and the worst one, which is,
we might be able to say we have a shared enemy. And even that, I think, is in dispute at this point.
That's right. How the hell do we keep this thing together? Yeah. So here's where we need,
there's a really wonderful Arabic word called Asabiya, which I take from the 14th century Muslim
scholar Ibn Khaldun. Ibn Khaldun was one of the theorists of cyclical history. You get these
theories in ancient Greece, you get them in Islam, you get them today. The observation, he observed
that a tribe would come out of the desert, knock over the, you know, the soft rich people in the city,
take over, enjoy their riches, but their grandchildren are now pretty soft and the same
thing happens again. So there's an internet meme, hard times create strong men, strong men create
good times, good times create weak men, weak men create hard times. So I think that, I think that
that is, that is happening. Now, how do you create, keep, and those were tribal societies. These were still
based on lineage, those societies that he was writing about. In a secular liberal democracy
like the United States, we have to, oh, an Asabiya is the word for like cohesion, trust,
the ability of a group to act. And nothing creates Asabiya like a foreign attack. So World War II,
and especially Pearl Harbor, that created America, I mean, that's responsible for so much of America's
greatness in the 20th, in the late 20th century, because my parents' generation, everybody who
remembers that attack, they all came together for five years, everything was for the war effort,
they were united. And then when they went on to go into politics, they could work together.
That's, we call them the greatest generation. So, so having some, if you keep your eye on Asabiya,
you could, or, or cohesion, you can, you can address this question of what can a large
liberal democracy, a secular one, like the UK or the US, what can you do? In the US,
we've long had what was called the American civil religion, or civic religion from Robert Bella,
sociologist. And, you know, when I was growing up, there was a real reverence for the founding
fathers, the flag, the Declaration of Independence, our founding documents, it really is religious.
It's like, you know, and the way they're presented in the archives, you know, with like soft light,
and it really is a religious thing that we had in America, the Constitution and the Declaration,
those were our sacred documents. So things like that can create Asabiya, and especially in a diverse
country like the United States. Of course, World War II did that, the Cold War did it, the Cold War is
over. So we don't have the common enemy. In America, we never had shared blood, that's one of our great,
a risk point, but it became our great strength that we found out, how do you stitch people together
without the common blood. And so I think that's why we were such an example to the world of a
liberal democracy. What shared and shared gods, to a large extent, we did used to have shared gods,
it was all Protestants at first, with some Catholics, and then sort of, you know, the Catholic Protestant
thing goes into a little bit of Jews, and okay, Judeo-Christian. So, you know, we did have a sort of
a shared Western Christian, Judeo-Christian heritage. And, you know, so diversity, diversity brings a number
of benefits, but it also tends to reduce Asabiya. So, you know, I wish, and this is one of my points
with Heterodox Academy, we really, really need good social science more than ever before. You know,
maybe the 1930s, we needed it just as much, but we really need good social science. And the social
sciences are getting so ideological, they're not capable of doing full honest exploration of any issue
on which, you know, someone will say that's not politically correct, or that's, you know, you're not
allowed to say that. So yeah, I'm very alarmed about the future of liberal democracies based on
the older model that may not be applicable. And it seems to me that this is all tied into mental
health, but also the way social media fetishizes mental health. Yes. And as a result of that,
that ties into a fragility amongst Gen Z. So I'll give you an example. So before we started this show,
I helped her on a comedy club. And there was this very young, you know, very good comedian,
actually Gen Z comic who turned up and he went on, he didn't have a particularly good set and he was
booked for two sets that night. He turned around, looked to me and went, I broke up with my girlfriend
two days ago. My mental health is really bad. I can't carry on. I can't do the second set. And he
just simply walked out. And I was utterly dumbfounded because I've never seen that type of behavior.
That's right. It's unprofessional. But it's the norm. If you have anxiety, the world must accommodate
you. So yes, let's talk a bit more about mental health because there's a lot more to say on this.
Let's bring in the sex difference here because this is actually very important.
So boys and girls, they've both gotten much more anxious and depressed. For the girls, it was a very
sharp. In all the graphs you'll see in the book, for the girls, there's really a sharp elbow right
around 2012, at least in the United States. Like it was flat and then boom, it goes up like a hockey
stick. For the boys, the curve is more gradual. Because 2012 is basically when Facebook buys
Instagram, all the girls get on Instagram in 2012, and by 2013, their mental health is worse.
Boys, it's more they're withdrawing from the real world. Boys, they've been getting into video games
since the 90s. They're failing to do things that will toughen them, that will make them into men.
They're failing to do things that will make them attractive to women later on. So boys are kind of
they're kind of wimping out. They're not up to the task of a challenge like that. And they're all
marinating in this idea about mental health, mental health. Now, one counter argument I've gotten is,
oh, you know, it's not a real increase in anxiety, depression. It's just that Gen Z is so comfortable
talking about it. That's a good thing. Like they should be talking about it. We don't want stigma.
Yeah, that's right. We don't want stigma. And my entire career as a psychologist, we've been reducing
stigma. And by 2012, you know, we were very popular. I mean, there wasn't much stigma left to saying you're
depressed or anxious. Once the girls get on various groups on their YouTube groups, TikTok groups,
Instagram groups about mental illness, now what you have is girls talking to each other. It's
overwhelmingly female, the mental health groups, girls talking to each other with no professionals
in sight, and an algorithm that means that whoever is the most extreme becomes the most prestigious.
And so in certain pockets of social media, you get the extreme valorization of mental illness. And
this is a horrible thing to do to girls. This makes them sicker. So this idea that, oh,
social media is great, they find a support community, like, no, stop it, stop it. And here,
I think Abigail Schreier has been great. I haven't read her book yet. I've been so busy with this,
but I've heard her on podcasts. You know, just immersing kids in these ideas about illness,
as opposed to giving them opportunities to grow, it's a pretty good way to make them ill.
And also, as well, there's also always been a social contagion element when it comes to mental
illness with teenage girls. And you see that with anorexia.
Exactly.
And actually, and I remember in one school that I didn't work in, but was near to me,
one girl tried to commit suicide, and about, I think, four or five of her friends then proceeded
to do the same as well. That's right.
And these girls were left with life-changing injuries as a result.
That's right. That's right. So I go into this in the book. One of the main differences between
boys and girls is that because of the influence of prenatal testosterone,
it shifts the brain over into what Simon Baron-Cohen in the UK, autism researcher,
says, you know, the male brain, you know, it's all derived from the original brain,
which is a female form. The male brain is shifted over to be a little higher on systemizing,
a little lower on empathizing. And so boys were a little more socially clueless,
more interested in things and machines, more drawn to computers and video games,
but less open to each other's emotions. They just don't notice necessarily.
Whereas girls are more socially perceptive, more socially concerned. They have a much more elaborate
mental map. They want to know who's fighting with whom, who's dating whom. They're more socially
concerned. And so that can be a great strength, but it also became a huge vulnerability when social
media companies developed this advertising-driven model where now you've got to get attention.
You have to play on their insecurities. You ping them. Oh, do you want to see what somebody just
said about you? Oh, somebody commented on your photo. Come back, come back. And as we all know,
you're busy, but you say, oh, I'll just check it out for a second. And before you know it,
you've spent 20 minutes going. So the girls are particularly vulnerable to being exploited by
social media. They're particularly vulnerable to sharing emotions, especially negative emotions,
anxiety, depression, anorexia. So Abigail Schreier and I, from what I've heard on podcasts,
we generally agree about what's happening to kids. Our only disagreement, I think, is that she thinks
that I'm putting too much emphasis on the phones rather than the therapy and what the adults are
doing. And I agree, I didn't talk much about that. She's right that that's a big piece of it.
But part of my argument is it was the move onto permanent full-time phones and social media
that allowed the crazy over-therapization by unprofessionals and people faking, not faking it,
but that all floods in around 2012 because that's when we have the great rewiring.
And also, if you look at what's happening to girls, particularly with Instagram, you get this,
for want of a better term, pornification of society, where you see girls being hypersexualized.
And I'm 42 years old and I remember I went for dinner recently on a night out and I looked around
at all these young women and they'd all had the lip fillers. They'd all had that kind of hypersexualized
plastic surgery at the age of 22 or 23, where they're in the full bloom of youth.
And you're thinking to yourself, you don't need plastic surgery. And you wonder what that's doing
to women's mental health and self-perception when you see photos of people who don't look like they
do in real life, but on Instagram they look a certain way and also pornography as well on top of that.
That's what, there's so much to say about that. Just this morning, I sometimes read Stoic writings
in the morning, and just this morning I was reading Epictetus, and he has a line about how
girls at the age of 14, we call them ladies, and we evaluate them on their beauty, and this makes
them, you know, this makes them very focused on their looks, their beauty. He's sort of commenting
on what a waste, how sad it is that girls suddenly are just appreciated as physical, and he says as sexual
partners. So this is always a risk in society, that as girls are entering puberty, suddenly
men are more interested in them. And, you know, me growing up in the 70s and 80s, it was kind of like,
my recollection was, it was a constant struggle to tell girls, you don't have to wear makeup,
you don't have to look pretty, you should have a career, you should become an independent person,
and boy did we make progress in the 70s, 80s, 90s. And so to see now, you know, to see now,
middle school girls, they're spending a lot of time in Sephora, they're going to Sephora to buy
expensive face creams and skin treatments, you know, they're 11 and 12 years old, they have perfect skin,
they shouldn't be thinking this way. But because everything is about how you how you look, especially
for girls, and the way the best way to look is sexy, that is, so they pose in the same way, you
know, boobs out, you know, lips, lips larger, there's a kind of a porn pose, porn seeps down into the
things they do. They've all seen porn, I mean, you can't be on the internet and not see porn. So they've
all seen it, but it filters into the way the girls self present. And again, just like an unbelievable
destruction of human capital. You know, it's really clear with the boys who are dropping out of life,
but it's really clear with the girls who are being shunted into a focus on beauty and sexiness. It's
so sad. And what effect is this exposure via the phone to hardcore pornography? We're seeing it in
girls, but what is the effect that it's having on boys? Yeah. So we cover this in the book, there is
some research, it's a very difficult field to do experiments in, especially with under 18.
You know, you can't do experiments with under 18. All you can do is surveys of what are you watching.
And we know that very few girls are daily, you know, all girls have seen pornography, but
very few of them look at it every day. Whereas the percent of boys who do is growing a lot. It's not,
it's, I don't know if it's the majority, but it's, you know, it's 20, 30, 40 percent. I mean,
a lot of them are watching every day. And it's not like, you know, a Playboy centerfold,
a beautiful woman that you then fantasize about having sex with. It's hardcore, you know,
you know, closeups of anal sex. You don't need to fantasize.
Yeah, that's right. It's all there. It's all there. That's right. And it shows a way,
you know, it shows a way of treating women, you know, roughly, very rough, and then they love it,
or they, you know. So if you imagine, you know, a boy just beginning to feel sexuality,
and, you know, whether they're gay or straight, it's all beginning at the same time. I don't know
anything about gay porn. But for heterosexual boys, you know, the additive, what is beautiful?
How do you have sex? What are women like? What do they want? And so one of the most disturbing things
is the choking, that the boys, boys are increasingly choking girls during sex. And some of them say,
well, the girls ask for it. And I don't know, maybe some of them do, but I'm sure many of them don't.
The point is, it's hard enough for boys and girls to understand each other. It's hard enough to learn
to flirt, to be effective at it, to the point you can then have a boyfriend and girlfriend,
to the point where you might, you know, go steady, to the point where you might fall in love, the
point where you might eventually get married. All that has always been very difficult. And I think
the pornification of childhood makes it much more difficult. I think we're going to see plummeting
rates of marriage and childbearing. Those numbers have been going down steadily since the 70s, I
think. You know, marriage and childbirth have both been going down, around the developed worlds, not
just the US, down steadily. But my prediction is when we get to Gen Z is now 28, the oldest. So I think
we're going to see a real steepening, a drop in birth rates to be more like Korea, where it's, I think,
less than one child per woman. So what we're talking about really is civilizational collapse.
If things keep going the way they're going, then yes, the trends are so bad that if we don't do
something about it, then yes, we will have an ever-shrinking population of ever more anxious
people. That's the way we're headed. But I think we're going to do something about it. And what I'm
so excited about with this book is, you know, I'm used to being Cassandra and prophesying doom and gloom
in our universities and our democracy and all these problems and now AI. You know, I have a lot of
writing that's doom and gloom. But this one is the most optimistic thing I've ever done. Because
once you understand how we got into this, once you understand that it's a collective action problem,
that the reason why now in the UK, it's just in Britain, 24% of your five to seven-year-olds have
their own smartphone, their own smartphones five to seven. That's insane. Because it's just like,
yeah, just, you know, it keeps them quiet. It's a babysitter. You know, we, you know, life is,
life is easier for us if our five-year-old has his own phone. But we got into that for a lot of
reasons. But one of the main ones is because if you don't give, and you're going to find,
if you don't give your kids screens and everyone else has them, your kid is going to feel left out,
if he's the only one. Right. So the trick is, how do you mix it? Nobody's the only one. Right.
We don't have to get 100%, but if we can get even 20 or 30%, suddenly, you know, it's easy.
There's a community there for you to be part of. Exactly. The non-fun community.
Yeah, that's right. So, so what I propose in the book is, you know, there's a lot of specific
suggestions for parents, for teachers, for, um, but the four norms, if we, if we, if we understand
it's a collective action problem, and then with four norms, we can break the collective action
problem, we can escape collectively. They're so simple, and we can do them all. I'll just list them.
No smartphone before 14, I'm sorry, no smartphone before high school. In the United States,
we have this nice clean break between eighth and ninth grade. So just keep them out of middle
school and below. Let kids have a flip phone or a phone watch, but no smartphones. No social media
until 16. This stuff is not appropriate for minors, but I think 16 is a reasonable sort of minimum age
at which we would allow kids on. Phone-free schools, and this is a no-brainer, and this is really
happening. The phones are such gigantic distraction devices. Test scores around the world have
literally been going up for decades and decades and decades until 2012, and now they're going
down and down and down. Not just from COVID, it started in 2012. So phone-free schools
from beginning to end of the day. And then the fourth is far more independence, free play, and
responsibility in the real world. So if you, if constantly you told me you're great, you and your
wife are raising your kid without screens, that's going to be a very lonely life, unless, unless you
have a few other families. If you, you know, soon your son will have friends, just be in touch with
the friend's parents. They probably share your concerns. And if you all agree, we're not giving
screens, but you know what we're going to give? Every week they're going to have a sleepover with
these four boys. Every week they're going to have a sleepover. It's going to go two days long.
They can go down to the store and buy candy for all we care. Just let them have fun together.
Now it's thrilling. Now it's not deprivation. It's fun. And that's what we have to give them back.
So if we do those four things, we can actually fix this problem in the next year or two.
Well, we're British, so your unbridled optimism is offensive to us. But John, I want to talk about,
I think none of the three of us are actually that keen to get involved in political conversations.
And what I'm about to ask you isn't coming from that place. But we were talking before we started
about where we see ourselves politically. And you talked about being in the center and
attempting to see things rationally without too much passion. And I think one of the other reasons
Francis and I had this felt sense about starting trigonometry and the things that we were concerned
about is the sense that, you know, Jordan Peterson talks about this, you know, order and chaos,
that it's not that we are these sort of like hardcore conservatives who want there to be
absolute order and everything. But just the sense that when society moves too much towards chaos,
that's not A, that's not good in and of itself. And B, that will often trigger a snapback that can be
very harsh as we've seen in the 20th century towards societies obsessed with order. Even,
you know, Diana Fleischmann, who we had on, who's an evolutionary psychologist,
she talked about the fact that when there's a higher prevalence of disease in society,
people become more small C conservatives. I think it's fair to say we've seen that in the last few
years. That's right. That's right.
So I definitely feel that part of the reasons we do, the reason we do what we do is we're concerned
about the increasing chaos, whatever, you know, whether that's high levels of crime, whether
that's illegal and whatever. And I'm worried about the snapback. What do you see?
Oh, yes. So let me put on the table here a really powerful theory from a political scientist named
Karen Stenner, an Australian political scientist. She wrote this amazing book called The Authoritarian
Dynamic, which was really influential on me when I wrote The Righteous Mind. And what Karen's work
shows is that whenever people perceive what she calls normative threat, that means a threat to the
moral order. So it's like it activates, it's like you press a button in their heads, and she finds that
about a quarter or a third of all people have this authoritarian response. And they're not all on the
right. They're often on the left. Yeah, we've seen that.
That's right. That's right. Exactly. You got it. You got it. So when there's a perceived threat to the moral
order, it's like the superorganism comes back together, and you could call it asabia if you
want. It is a kind of a cohesion where we have to come together and kick out the deviants, the aliens.
And so in her research, she would do things like she found if you give people an article about like
Mexicans coming over the border, they become more racist against Mexicans, but also against black
people. Like they just see, they just want to like clamp down on like, we have to return to, you know,
the moral order and who we, so she calls it the authoritarian dynamic, and it's very powerful.
And chaos sweeps authoritarian dictators into power. If you have chaos, you're going to, you know,
Adolf Hitler or, you know, someone can just come to power, a strong man. You know, in Brazil, I think on the
flag, it says, you know, order and progress. So chaos tends to push many people to the right,
or at least towards an authoritarian. And so that's the first piece. Now let me add on to that,
you know, the analysis I gave in the righteous mind, because we know that politics is highly
heritable, whether you are on the left or the right, if you have an identical twin separated at
birth, you're probably going to have similar politics, because it's a temperament thing about
openness to experience and conscientious, all sorts of things. So if you have a society in which some
people, they just really want to change, they question everything, why do we do it this way?
Why don't we do it differently? Well, it's good to have some people who do that. But then you also
have some people who say, no, the old ways are tried and true, you know, let's not go changing
them until we, you know, unless we really need to. And so this is, you know, Edmund Burke, this is the
conservative impulse. So when I started The Righteous Mind, I was a progressive, I wanted to help the
Democrats stop losing, you know, to George W. Bush. And I was very much on the left. But by the time I
finished the book, I realized, wow, to have a good society is so difficult. And you got to get the
settings just right. And if you have some people pushing for change, and some people resisting,
you get this dynamic that can be incredibly productive. That's when I really became a centrist.
As a social scientist, I was kind of, I was increasingly bothered that most social scientists are on the,
not just that, you know, almost all are on the left, other than some economists, they're almost
all on the left, but many of them act as though they are the support team for the Democratic Party.
And I used to be like that too. And I think that is unprofessional, we've got to stop.
So, so I became a principled centrist by principle. What I mean is, it's not like I'm a centrist on every
issue because the answer is in the middle. No, I'm a centrist because, because of human imperfections,
because of confirmation bias, we need people to disconfirm, we need to interact with people
to disconfirm our bias. In fact, can I bring on the John Stuart Mill book? Where is that?
Of course.
Of course you can.
Let's see. Yeah, let's bring it on. Okay. So, so this is, so John Stuart Mill's On Liberty is one
of the greatest works of Western philosophy, the greatest thing ever written about, about the importance
of free speech. And in particular, you know, in particular, what Mill does is he points out that
when we shut people down, we don't just hurt them, we hurt ourselves, we make us all stupider. You know,
the most famous line, line in here, I know it by heart, he who knows only his own side of the case
knows little of that. And it just, you know, so, so I took, at Heterodox Academy, we took chapter two
of On Liberty. You know, it's 15,000 words with a lot of obscure historical examples. And with Richard
Reeves, this great British intellectual policy person, now American, we've got him. But so he and I
condensed it down to half that, to 7,000 words. And this amazing artist, Dave Cicerelli, came to me
and said, can I help you? I love what you do with Heterodox Academy. And I said, yeah, read, read this
chapter, and then illustrate the metaphor. So you get these amazing, you know, illustrations of people
locked, you know, you know, people locked into their head, you know, prison of thought. And, um,
What John's saying, Gen Z, is he's, they've even put in pictures for you. Yes. Go read it. Yes.
There's a coloring in bit as well. Beautiful, beautiful illustrations. So I'm an intuitionist.
That is, I believe that we need to feel something, and then also get the reasons, and then we know it.
So that was our idea with this book. And Dave is so brilliant, that then he checked in with me again
last year and said, hey, John, how you doing? I said, Dave, the publisher's come up with a terrible
cover for my book. I don't like it. Can you do better? And he did this. Wow. It's, you know,
it's a girl kind of drowning in a ball pit of, of emojis and smiles. And, and he and I did this
guerrilla art campaign. Dave created these 12 foot tall milk cartons that say on them, missing
childhood. Wow. So anyway, um, there you go. Yeah. So here, work by Dave Cicerelli. Awesome.
Yeah. Um, we've, we've actually done our hour and I want to spend another 40 minutes or so on locals
talking about some more, uh, more controversial stuff, more difficult stuff, et cetera. So we're
going to go and do that in a second. We're going to ask you some questions our supporters have submitted.
Uh, before we do that, we always end the main part of the interview with the same question, which is
what's the one thing we're not talking about as a society that you think we should be?
Hmm. Ah, let's see. And there's so much, I mean, there's, you know, there, there's so much
that we don't talk about because we're afraid of the social consequences. So, you know, exploring the,
just a pure sociological exploration of the effects of diversity, I think would be extremely important
to do. And the socials and sociology should be doing that. But sociology is incredibly ideological
field. They're, you know, they're not a lot of sociologists. Well, it's a sacred subject,
really, isn't it? Exactly. We've given these things sacred status. That's right.
So diversity is our strength is a thing that you're not supposed to investigate because you
might find that it's not. And then what are you going to do with that? That's right. Because
it's an Orwellian sort of phrase. And so one, another, a whole another line of writing that I have,
is on fiduciary duty and professional responsibility. I think as professors, as academics,
we have a, we have two fiduciary duties. Fiduciary duty is way above normal legal obligations.
It's pure, perfect. You must never betray it. You must never act in a way that helps you,
but harms the fiduciary, the person that you are fiduciary for. I think as professors,
we have two fiduciary duties. One is to our students' education, not to their welfare,
to their education. We must never act in a way that puts our politics ahead of their education.
And we do it all the time. So that I think is a horrible violation of our fiduciary duty.
That's one reason why America, especially, not just on the right, but Americans in the center,
have lost a lot of trust in higher ed in this country. But the main fiduciary we have as scholars
is to the truth. We must never, ever say something that is not true because somebody paid us money to
do it. Now that almost never happens. Money is not the big threat in the academic world. We must never,
ever say something that is not true because our politics demands it. And that's everyday life in the
social sciences and the humanities. So the, you know, the corruption of academic research is not
from money. I mean, in medical areas it is, but for the most part, it's not from money. It's from the
fact that we have almost no viewpoint diversity and therefore certain things become sacred, not the
truth. That's why I co-founded Heterodox Academy with other social scientists and with a legal scholar,
Nick Rosencrantz, because we were not, it wasn't about a left-right thing. It was about, we love
universities. We want them to work. They're not working. And they're, you know, so anyway, I think
universities have made their bed by allowing this stuff to happen. And now they're lying in it and
unable to, unable to have a clear voice on, on protests and, and intimidation. Well, we're going to talk
about protests on campus. We're going to talk about diversity. We're going to talk about what you can do
with your kids in terms of solving the problems that we've talked about so far and a lot more, including
your questions on local. So head on over there now.
