hi everyone welcome to reason with science i'm your host jitendo this episode is with
dennis noble he is a renowned biologist physiologist and system theorist known for
his pioneering research in the fields of cardiac physiology and systems biology in this conversation
we talk about the topics related to evolution including neo-darwinism the role of dna as
information the use of genes as templates for evolution the emerging fields of epigenetics
the significance of bioelectricity and potential future directions for evolutionary research
enjoy the conversation share and subscribe to support the podcast thank you for listening
hi dennis welcome to the podcast very pleased to talk to you jitenda so um i mean of course
i was thinking about this question uh what drives evolution and how we can start the conversation
in a way you know so but as being a biochemist and molecular biologist i reached to that point
you know to to kind of uh understand what is the code of life what is that uh message so
so main um main kind of notion in the field is that it is the dna it is genome which is
the code of life so what are your views on um this this kind of notion of the code of life
and especially dna being um at the center of the the the whole uh theater very very good and very wide
question and what i'm going to say does not in any way whatsoever challenge the major discoveries of
molecular biology in the 1950s and 1960s where the work of watson and crick and um dear me i've just
forgotten her name now the lady who got that beautiful um rosalind franklin rosalind franklin there we've
got it when i mentioned her in a big debate with richard dawkins last year there was huge enthusiasm
from all the women in the audience but a few men were applauding too yeah yes rosalind franklin um
no i don't challenge in any way the great significance of the discovery of the double
helical nature of dna and the way it is arranged in in cells and functions in cells nor do i challenge
in any way the one way the one way sequence um coding if one wants to use that word from dna to rna to
proteins and no possibility of the sequence of amino acids in a protein somehow being back translated into
um rna or dna and indeed it couldn't be for very good technical reason um the coding between those dna
sequences and the protein amino acid sequences is redundant and therefore it's actually strictly
speaking impossible to go the other way um using the sequence of amino acids to get the sequence the
exact sequence of the nucleotides but i maintain that that's not the way in which we should expect an
organism to try to direct its evolutionary reaction to changes in the environment because control
mechanisms are present now why are they present and how are they present and here we just have to be
a little bit technical for a moment on the exact molecular biology and the process of control of the
molecular biology usually the strict reductionists would say that that central dogma of molecular
biology from dna coding to protein amino acid sequences is never reversed and that is true
true however that is not the way in which organisms control what happens that arises because of a very
simple fact which is that the dna is not itself a self-replicator it replicates it gets replicated and i
think that's a better expression for it but it's not a self-replicator and let's just go through
the detailed molecular biology the double helix as everybody appreciated when the central dogma was
formulated means that each nucleotide naturally connects to its partner the cg80 coding is based on that
so when the double helix unravels as it must during copying and replication
the each of the nucleotides that like to be together attract each other that's a simple chemical fact
so as you have one um thread of the double helix open the appropriate partners will naturally chemically
come in place now that's very much like crystallization crystals form and grow because the molecules in
solution not yet in the crystal find it easy in a kind of lock and key fashion to fit into the rest of
the crystal and that's how a crystal grows now that is partly true of how dna replicates because as the
double helix is unraveled each of the nucleotides will bind up chemically with its partner
however there's always an energy to that process of binding and that means from that energy of binding
you can calculate how often that will go wrong or you can just simply measure how often it goes wrong
we know the answer to that it's about one in ten thousand base pairs
now that is remarkable if you think about it before we go on to why it's not sufficient it's remarkable
because if you or i wrote a ten thousand word article and we had only one typo in that ten thousand word
article we would be very pleased so would the publisher one tiny correction to do that's the end of it
however that is sufficient to come back to nature to life that is sufficient for small viruses
a typical coronavirus of maybe twenty or thirty thousand um base pairs well it will get the odd one
one or two um changes that occur during each replication that's incidentally why viruses uh mutate
fairly quickly so during the coronavirus pandemic we've seen that happening um before our eyes
is however our your and my uh dna is three billion base pairs long now if you do the calculation the
difference between um uh ten to the four ten to the power four which is ten thousand and ten to the power
nine which is a billion is many hundreds of thousands in fact it's very close to a million fold difference
now we come to the real key where the control comes in what then happens and as biochemists have
beautifully revealed for us over the last 40 or 50 years a whole army of enzymes those are chemicals that can
facilitate reactions which facilitate both the cutting of a nucleotide sequence and the pasting together
of a nucleotide sequence they come in and directed by the cell to do the job they discover where the
errors are you can do that of course because in practice what is happening is they detect where there's
a mismatch um the the t is not connected to an a and it has therefore to be corrected so they actually
go in and cut it out and put another one in i mean it sounds absolutely unbelievable but yet this is what
we know chemically that is what happens now i come to the control you see that process
is what ensures that normally when a cell gets its dna copied there will be an almost exact copy in the
daughter cells in fact the error rate then is only about one in 10 billion that's a fantastic performance
by nature and we have to applaud whatever enabled this to develop but it's what we find now we come to
the interesting question what was going on during the pandemic when we were invaded by coronavirus
in your body and mine and everybody else's body something very interesting was happening
the organism's immune system had detected that a new invader had arrived we did not have the immunoglobulin
that's the protein that is necessary for grabbing and holding on to the invader and neutralizing its
action that we did not have the right immunoglobulin to attack that particular virus so what did the
immune system do it told the relevant immune system cells to stop the error correction being so completely
accurate so that naturally by random errors in that initial stage of allowing the sort of crystallization
if you want to call it that of the nucleotides to occur so that a lot of errors were allowed to happen
that produces literally millions of new nucleotide sequences from which the immune system can choose i use these
words very um deliberately i know that some um chemists and molecular biologists might bridle a little
bit at the word choose but i find it very difficult to use any other word it literally says okay um this
cell has produced an immunoglobulin that grabs the virus and well what do we do we tell that cell to
reproduce as fast as possible and all the other cells are told to apoptose that's the technical word for
please die please go um now i think the standard evolutionary biologists meaning those who subscribe to
the modern synthesis or neo-darwinist synthesis would say well dennis that's an exception it's what richard
dawkins will say um that's an exception dennis that's just the immune system um playing around with
uh a very clever mechanism uh we agree uh it's it's it's strange but it is nevertheless uh not the usual
situation well i looked largely prompted by a great um biochemist at the university of chicago james
shapiro chapiro the initiator of the concept of natural genetic engineering the idea that the
organism can as it were go in and change its genome he certainly has shown that it's not just the immune
system that does this what he actually showed was that bacteria do it when a colony of bacteria are
um under stress because of for example an antibiotic um they do exactly the same thing as a colony
they allow their genomes to mutate and they reduce the error correction so that just like the immune system
some of those in the colony will find a solution and that's how we develop the resistance of bacteria to
antibiotics a big health problem incidentally but what's what he showed in effect was exactly the same
process occurs in a colony of bacteria well is it general that's the remaining question
and through reading shapiro's book from 2011 um his book on evolution i discovered and you can all easily
check it in the paper published in 2001 by the team that did the first sequencing of the complete
sequencing of the human genome and what that paper in 2001 shows in figure 42 of that paper there's the
detail is extraordinary they looked at a comparison in different organisms all the way
from microorganisms to the human of particular kinds of proteins the two proteins that they looked at were
transcription factors and chromatin uh proteins and what you find is extraordinary as you go from the
very simplest organisms to much more complex organisms there is an accretion
of domains the proteins become longer with much more functionality
but they've not done so by the standard theory of evolution which is tiny mutations slowly
accumulating to produce a new sequence because that would produce a random sequence
what happens is that whole domains have been moved around to produce by accretion the much more complex
proteins so we know therefore that somehow organisms must have been able to move great chunks of the dna
individuals who bear to view the different humans to the world so that are
microscopy to look at the chromosomes in corn, the kind of corn that we eat, maize is the other word
for it. In fact, it's often called Indian corn. And what she showed with simple microscopy is that
exactly as the human genome sequencing found in 2001, chunks of protein have, or the coding for
that protein, has moved around to recombine to produce new proteins. Now, is that conceivable?
How could that possibly happen if everything is random and the system doesn't know where to do
the cutting, for example? How do you know that you go into a particular place? Well, we know that too.
Come back to the immune system again. That phasing down of the error correction is only done in a very
tiny part of the genome. In fact, it's the part of the genome that codes for the immunoglobulins. These
are the proteins that enable the system to capture a new virus or a new bacterium or anything else that
attacks the organism. And in fact, it's not even the whole of the sequence for the immunoglobulin.
When Gerald Edelman got the Nobel Prize for immunology research way back about 50 years ago, when he first
discovered that it became clear, just a technical matter about immunoglobulins, there's part of the
immunoglobulin structure which is straight like this. It enables the immunoglobulin to sit in a cell membrane
and it has its claws, its pair of pliers, if you like, sticking out like two arms which come together.
And that is exactly what happens when it attacks the virus or the bacterium. It actually neutralizes it by
binding to it in a lock and key fashion. Now we come to the extraordinary fact. It's only that part of
the immunoglobulin that has changed. That's the only part where the error correction is reduced to enable
the new sequences to be produced from which you can choose the one that works.
So what I'm explaining in this aspect of responding to your question is whether you look at the immune
system, whether you look at bacteria responding to antibiotics, or you look at cancer cells, for
example, responding to radiotherapy, I could show the same process occurring there, or chemotherapy.
That's why late stage metastasis is actually very difficult to control by those processes. Or whether
you look at the history of how genomes have developed, which is what the Human Genome Project managed to do
in 2001, you find exactly the same process occurring. That is that organisms have been able to actively
go in and change the genome in functional ways. Now, that is crucial because it is forbidden
by the modern synthesis or neo-Darwinism. There should be no directionality to the alterations of
genomes. So there it is. I hope I've explained that in very simple terms that even non-biochemists
can understand. But it is actually, therefore, at the molecular level of analysis, that as I see it,
the modern synthesis has been unraveled. I don't think it can be put back together again.
Yeah, you did. I mean, this was really, first of all, thank you for starting with this big picture view,
in general, like how we can think of different things like DNA and how different life forms they
depend on it. You explained beautifully the replication part of it. And then, of course,
that like the what drives evolution in a way that you kind of explain the variation part,
which generally neo-Darwinist people, they would think that it's accepted that it's the randomly
accumulated, accumulated mutations. But that's not the case, what you are explaining that the…
Unfortunately not. Now, I say unfortunately, because, you know, I actually respect the founders
of the modern synthesis. They were some of the best scientists of the 20th century. You know,
if I list them, J.B.S. Haldane, absolutely brilliant man. R.A. Fisher first introduced quantitative
aspects into genetics. You know, fabulous. Julian Huxley, a great synthesizer. Actually, I've read
in detail his 1942 book, Evolution, the Modern Synthesis. I have huge respect for the accuracy,
the detail. It's a work of scholarship. It's not just a popularization of the idea of the modern
synthesis. I think they were all shocked when, for example, Julian Huxley, but others too,
Maynard Smith, J.B.S. Haldane. No, he'd already, I think, passed away then. But anyway, he would have
been had he seen it. They were shocked by the central dogma of molecular biology. Their reaction,
essentially, was, oh, that means that we're right. We suppose that it was totally random,
that there is no way in which the higher level of organization of an organism can in some way
influence the molecular biology. So the central dogma of molecular biology now totally confirms
our idea and that of August Weissman, who first proposed the idea, that somehow the DNA of our
sperm and egg cells is totally protected from any influence by the organism or the environment. And
that's what Richard Dawkins says, of course. They're sort of encased in their germline. They cannot be
altered. So we, as organisms, cannot in any way influence what's passed on to later generations.
Now, they were so convinced by that. Julian Huxley, in the second edition of his book,
Evolution, the Modern Synthesis, published in 1963, simply said, well, proteins have been dethroned.
That's the word he used. They have been dethroned as the essence of life in favor of DNA. But I don't
know whether one wants to enthrone any molecule in the body. But unfortunately, that was a big mistake.
They thought that that totally confirmed the Weissman idea, the Weissman barrier idea, that is,
that the germline was totally protected from any changes in the organism. Now I come to an extraordinary
fact. Darwin would never have agreed with that. I know the neo-Darwinists like to call themselves
neo-Darwinists, and the emphasis is always on the Darwin. But Darwin did not think that. In his 1868 book,
published nine years after the origin of species, he speculates in a very interesting way.
He says, well, if there is inheritance of acquired characteristics, that is, changes in the body
influencing future generations, then it must be the case that in some way or another,
the body itself communicates with the germline. We can't see whatever it is does that. So I
will propose that tiny spores from cells in the body get released and get transmitted to the germline.
Now, he used the word gemmules spores. Now, that's not totally surprising. When a mushroom, and he knew
about mushrooms, when a mushroom throws its spores out, they are in effect, very, very tiny little bits
of life that come out of the cells of the mushroom, and they then spread through the air, and they land
somewhere else. And of course, they give rise to new mushrooms. So he speculated that these gemmules,
as he called them, would contain all the features to enable life to be reproduced. On that, he was wrong.
There are spores that come out of the cells of our body, and I'll come back to those in a moment.
But they are not able to reproduce complete cells. But they do contain RNAs, DNAs, proteins, and many
other metabolites.
What are they?
These are the exosomes, the extracellular vesicles that have been discovered with a fantastic
biochemical technique. I actually knew, because he's passed away now, Roger Chen, the person who
first developed the method of labeling chemicals with fluorescent groups, so that you could identify
a particular RNA or DNA or a protein or whatever you were labeling by attaching something that fluoresces
yellow, green, red, mauve, purple, or whatever. You get beautiful images. Just go online and ask
to look at cells fluorescing or vesicles fluorescing. Now, recently, in the last 20 or so years,
biochemists, physiologists and similar biological scientists have realized that this is the way to
bypass the limitation of light microscopy. You see, the problem for Darwin was that a 19th century microscope
could not possibly see tiny vesicles as small as what we now are released from all cells of the body.
And when people first discovered this process of release using electron microscopes way back
about 40 or 50 years ago, the initial idea was it's all rubbish that is pouring out from the cell.
The cell extrudes its rubbish just as we extrude our rubbish. Sorry for the analogy, but it's true,
roughly speaking. In fact, all organisms have to extrude rubbish, so maybe it was all rubbish. But
much later, it was found that some of these vesicles actually contain information that other cells use,
and that's a fundamental discovery. Now we come to the way that's done. The fluorescent
part of the molecule sends light out and it may be yellow, red, green, or whatever.
Now, that means that with light, even standard light microscopy,
you do not have to worry about the resolution level of ordinary light microscopy because those
light beams are not reflected by passing light in, diffracting it, and coming out again.
They're actually emitted by the cells themselves or the vesicles themselves.
Now, get technical here for a moment, but the best way to look at it is to say that,
okay, you get a tiny red spot. A pixel in your image comes up with a particular color.
What you know, then, is that at the center of that spot, there is the particular RNA
or DNA that you have labeled. And that means that you can tell that that particular RNA is in that
vesicle. Now, a very clever Italian scientist, Corrado Spadafora, and many others in addition to
him have been able to use all of this insight to show that RNAs that control metabolism, for example,
can pass from the body to the germline. So, about four years ago, I wrote an article saying that Darwin
was absolutely correct. You see, he was doing the best he could, struggling with the fact that he had seen
the acquisition of acquired characteristics. He'd seen that sometimes the parents of organisms
pass down from one generation to another a propensity to a tendance towards a particular
biochemical ability or a particular structural ability. And, of course, it is possible, and
Weissman thought he could show this, that it might arise through slow accumulation of random mutations
with no directionality. I don't know why Darwin did not think like that. That's an interesting question.
I suspect that he was worried. I think he was worried by the fact this could sometimes happen quite
quickly. He knew, for example, that hybridization in plants, just bringing two species together to
produce a new type of plant. That's what rose breeders and many other plant breeders do, of course, all the
time. He knew that that could happen and that within a single generation, you've got a new species.
So I think he knew, and you can find texts in his Origin of Species where he says that
evolution doesn't always go slowly. Incidentally, coming back to Julian Huxley, he also knew that.
And I think that Darwin's problem was, well, somehow something must get through
of the body changes. Otherwise, this wouldn't be possible. This rapid change wouldn't be possible.
I think that's why he proposed his theory of gemmules. And it's remarkable that, what is it now, about 150
years later, physiologists and biochemists and cell biologists have been able to show that he was
absolutely correct. I think that if he were alive today, Charles Darwin would be celebrating.
Now, why would that be the case? Well, go to the biggest biography of Charles Darwin, written by
a man called Moore. I don't remember his first name for a moment. But anyway, it's a major biography of
Darwin published in 1991. I have the whole book here in my home. He shows that Darwin regarded that idea,
his gemmule idea, as his beloved child. I'm quoting from Moore's book. He loved the idea that it might be
true. Now, he can prove that because for the last 10 years of his life, from 1872 to 1882, when he
passed away, he actually collaborated with physiologists, particularly my predecessor as a
professor of physiology here in Oxford, John Burden Sanderson, and his student, a man called George
Romanis. And what Darwin and Romanis did for the last 10 years of Darwin's life was that Romanis would
go to Down House, that is the house south of London where Darwin was living, and they tried to see whether
if you hybridize different plants taking the roots and, as it were, grafting them together, whether you
could demonstrate the direct passage of information from one to the other. They failed. Now, you know,
by the 19th century standards, this was right at the edge of what might be done, and it didn't work.
But had Romanis, who passed away rather young, I'm afraid, about the age of 46, in the late 1890s,
had he lived just another 15 years, he would have seen the publication by Merischofsky in a Russian
journal. No, actually, it was in a German journal. It was published in German. The first demonstration
that what Darwin and Romanis were trying to do is absolutely correct. What Merischofsky showed was that if you look
for the way in which plants of mitochondria in our bodies, they are called plastids in the case of plants,
that those originated from the combination of symbiogenesis of two forms of life, a type of bacterium
that actually fused their bodies, their cells, because these are single cell organisms. And that's
the origin of plastids in plants. The energy producing process that enabled plants to capture sunlight and
produce so much energy is precisely that. Later, Lynn Margulis in about 1970 demonstrated the same
process in animal cells. All of our cells contain bacteria. Now, it seems a strange thing to say,
but our mitochondria, the energy producing substances producing all our ATP, originally a particular
type of bacterium, which fused that was one of the big steps in evolutionary biomes like us to evolve,
because otherwise it would have been impossible for enough energy to be produced by the cells to enable
multicellular life forms to exist. So I think that had Darwin's collaborator, George Romanes,
just lived another 15 years, he would have realized the place to look was not in big organisms like the
roots of carrots and turnips or whatever they were trying to graft together, but look at microorganisms,
because that's the key to how you get to multicellularity, that's organisms like you and me,
in the first place. Because without that, there would never have been the possibility for great
colonies of cells to come together to form the bodies of multicellular organisms. So I think that
Darwin did his best in the last 10 years of his life to deal with this problem that worried him. How could it
be that sometimes evolution is so rapid when normally the general idea came about and I think we've
totally confirmed it. I think it's a fascinating story. It's taken me about 10 years to unravel the
detail of all of this and I'm delighted to have been able to have the opportunity to do that.
When I debated this kind of question with Richard Dawkins last year, happened in June of last year,
that at a big festival here in the United Kingdom, we were asked to debate the selfish gene,
the ideas, to debate the ideas of the selfish gene. I'm afraid to say, because I have great respect for
Richard Dawkins and the brilliance of his writing is his fantastic writing. He and I both said to
each other in the debate, you know, you write brilliant books, but they're wrong. We laughed
about it, which is a good way to do this. Anyway, I think what is very evident from that recording by
the Institute of Art and Ideas, which organises the big festival, I think it's very clear that Richard,
unfortunately, does not know the relevant molecular biology. Actually, I think it's almost appropriate
that we have a silence following that because if you think about the implications of all of that,
that effectively the spectacular discoveries of molecular biology in the 50s, 60s, 70s of the last
century, do not have to be denied. Nobody's saying they did not occur. They did. They are spectacular and
it's the basis of biochemistry today. Nevertheless, they don't support the view that, for example, Julian
Huxley and Huxley had and John Maynard Smith had, which is that it's confirmed fully the modern synthesis
ideas. Unfortunately, that just does not happen to be true. Richard Dawkins admitted that in the debate
last year. He said, look, Dennis, if you were right and I've been wrong. Yes, I think that was totally
correct. That if I'm right, he's been wrong for 50 years. But sometimes that's how science advances.
So this is, I think, not the first time by any means that science had to face major challenges
and a need to rethink the fundamentals, in this case, the fundamentals of biological science. Because
at the beginning of the last century, physics had to face a very similar challenge. 1905, I think it was,
when Einstein first published his ideas on space-time and relativity, as he called it.
The idea that matter in the universe actually itself distorts the very basis of knowing where matter is,
which is space. And you can demonstrate that very easily by watching the bending of light that occurs
by massive galaxies. He made that as a prediction. It was absolutely correct.
And similarly, very soon afterwards, and partly through Einstein's own work to demonstrate how electrons
get passed out from excited atoms, quantum mechanics came in, which produced
a real fundamental change in conceptions of the universe, because the essence of quantum mechanics is
that you can't completely predict everything. It's got an essential stochasticity, an essential
chance element right at the heart of it. Now, why do I draw that analogy? I think because there's a very
similar process occurring in biology. You see, we thought, okay, there are chance changes in the DNA,
and this can be used by natural selection. I don't deny this at all, to slowly develop new varieties.
It's absolutely right. And that is Darwin and Wallace's original conception of the concept of natural
selection. The problem is whether it's entirely random or whether it's directed.
And I think we found that effectively there are the mechanisms by which those random changes
can be directed. I've classified that recently in my publications as a form of use of chance,
a use of stochasticity. I call it the harnessing of stochasticity, because it's as though from a high
level organization of the organism as it were looking down on the chance events occurring at the lowest level,
they can become controlled. Now, that's also a fundamental principle of physics, which I'm sure
Einstein would have fully understood when he formulated his theory of relativity.
And I'm sure also that the early quantum mechanics pioneers would have seen the analogy.
Thermodynamics, which is the way in which big parameters like temperature, volume, pressure,
get to develop as the consequence of constraint in the case of thermodynamics by the existence of vessels
within which the molecules exist. That's how you know how it can develop a particular temperature,
a particular pressure, a particular volume, just blow into a balloon. What you're doing is proving
that very point. A particular pressure develops inside the balloon. But that's not a property of
individual particles. It's a property of the ensemble. And I think what we're discovering
in biology is a form of directionality which is rather similar to thermodynamics. Thermodynamics gives a
directionality of an interesting kind because it means that everything is always tending towards
the increase in entropy of the universe. That's a hard notion, I know, for many people to understand.
The best way to look at it is that the process
process means that it goes towards increasing disorder in the universe. So you might have started with the
uniform situation of the Big Bang 13 and a half billion years ago, but very quickly clumps of gas and
particles started to accumulate and produce disorder. Now, life is interesting because it somehow disobeys that
basic rule because we actually order ourselves. We are the creators of order. Life creates order.
Now, it doesn't disobey the rules of thermodynamics because it does that at the expense of creating disorder
outside the organism. We use plants. We destroy their structure because we eat them. They get digested.
There's the process of us creating disorder in what was a highly ordered structure in order to continue
to live ourselves. So it doesn't disagree with the fundamental physics principle that order tends
towards disorder in the universe as a whole. But it does mean that life is doing something really quite
extraordinary. But in that case, it automatically means that we control it. We harness stochasticity.
I don't think the neo-Darvinists were right, therefore, to say we just experience it. There are chance
variations of our particles, our molecules, chance variations in the way in which DNA sequences
occur. But it can't be controlled in any way. Well, we know from the immune system and from the other
examples I've given, like bacteria hypermutating to avoid antibiotic problems, we clearly do use
stochasticity. So in a sense, I am fundamentally saying it's the wrong way round to think that there's just
chance at the bottom and everything else is subject to that chance variation and just natural selection
leading to any form of development. I think it's clear now that we do use chance
to develop the ways in which we develop. Now, when I say we use chance, I don't necessarily mean,
of course, that we intentionally do so. We certainly are not intending that our immune systems
manage to produce a new immunoglobulin. We can't ourselves, as it were, by thinking about it,
produce a new immunoglobulin. But what you might call the natural intelligence of organisms,
and I'm using the word intelligence there, just as you use it for artificial intelligence, we don't think
a computer is alive in the sense that we are, but it has intelligence in the sense that we've given it
processes by which it can develop suitable reactions to the environment through, of course, our programming
of the computer. And I think there's a similar process in biology. As organisms have developed,
they have developed intelligence. It won't always be conscious intelligence, of course. And the big
question, why on earth are some of us at least conscious, I don't think I have a solution to.
But what does seem to me to be absolutely clear now is that organisms do have the kind of intelligence
that enables them to direct, to some degree, their pathways of evolution. It doesn't mean to say we can
do everything or anything, but it means that within the constraints that we've already got, we are able,
to some degree, to direct it. Now, for humans, of course, that is fundamentally and very clearly true,
because we, through cultural evolution, which bypasses DNA completely, we have developed the most
extraordinarily rapid evolution of a species. We are not because of our DNA, but because of our
cultural evolution, we have developed way beyond the early Homo sapiens and the early Neanderthals,
way back hundreds of thousands of years ago. So we're not only harnessing charms within our bodies,
we're also harnessing ideas, which also contribute to the evolutionary process.
So what I'm arguing is that through cultural evolution, humans and I think other organisms too,
and that'll take me back to Darwin in a moment, have developed ways in which to bypass the standard
evolutionary process of the evolution of DNA. Our cultural evolution, of course, is facilitated by the
DNA we've got. If we didn't have an opposable thumb, we wouldn't have been able to produce all the
technical inventions we've produced. But having got it, it wasn't through DNA changes that we produced the
astounding cultural evolution of humans. Now, come back to Darwin once again. He also realized that,
and he did it in a very interesting way. It was in 1871 that he asked himself the question,
okay, humans can direct the evolution of, for example, dogs, cats, plants, fish, and whatever,
to produce new varieties. Can animals do it too? Can the peahen, when it sees two or three peacocks
displaying their fantastic fans, what does she do? Doesn't she choose between them? And
why is the peacock producing its fantastic fan? Well, surely this must be what enables him to convince
the peahen to mate with him. Now, Darwin actually wrote in his 1871 book that that is deliberate.
He actually says they consciously choose their mates. Now, if they do that, they're doing exactly what
cat breeders, dog breeders, fish breeders, plant breeders do all the time.
So he said, well, wait a minute, that means this isn't just natural selection.
This is what I called in my 1859 book, The Origin of Species. This is artificial selection.
What he was saying is that other organisms than humans can also do it. And I think he was absolutely
right. And it's another feature of the modern synthesis. What Darwin was saying in effect in 1871
is that not only can humans develop culturally, other organisms can do so too. They might not have
the language that we use, but watch birds, listen to them. They have a language of a kind.
And they certainly have language in the sense of display. I am great, is what that peacock is saying.
So Darwin realised that his original distinction between artificial selection, choice of breeders,
and natural selection, that there are exceptions to that. And I think he was quite right to do so.
But the natural selection idea was made, as it were, the only process in the modern synthesis.
Julian Huxley made that perfectly clear in his 1942 book, Evolution, the Modern Synthesis, that only
natural selection could account for what was happening. And I'm afraid to say, Darwin would have never
agreed with him. So on two central features of the modern synthesis, the impossibility of controlling
mutation rate and nature, and the idea that only natural selection could work, but that no way could
artificial selection be involved. On both of those, Darwin would have fundamentally disagreed.
He passed away in 1882, just before August Weissmann, who introduced the idea of the Weissmann barrier to stop
the influences from the body influencing the germline. So he wasn't around, as it were, to disagree with Weissmann,
nor around when, of course, people like Julian Huxley and others removed his idea of what he calls sexual
selection. But I would call it social selection. It doesn't have to be purely sexual. The organisms can
interact socially and decide they cooperate with these organisms, not those. You just watch packs of dogs or
packs of lions, prides of lions, we say, as they try to work out where they're going to attack in order to
get their next bit of food. They're cooperating. And they do so by signalling to each other.
So I think we are in the middle of a major rethink. And I know that, of course, the standard view,
and it must be believed by, I would guess, even 99% of most biologists still,
and certainly by the great majority of the public. I think we have to admit that we were misled all
those years ago from about 1942 onwards, when the modern synthesis was formulated. It was a brilliant
idea. It was a great simplification of biology. And, you know, we all would love to think that things are
simpler. We don't like complexity. We love to think that things are simple. Unfortunately,
it sometimes just isn't true. And I think what we've seen in the unraveling, as I would call it,
of the central dogma and its implications for evolutionary biology, and the unraveling of the story of
Darwin's gemmules and the unraveling of his idea of sexual selection or social selection,
I think we've got reason now to go back, roughly speaking, to what Darwin was maintaining
in the 1870s, that evolution has several processes by which it can occur.
So they are complementary. They don't oppose each other. But I think we need all of those processes
to really understand how organisms direct evolution. I mean, first of all, I listened to your conversation
with Richard Dawkins. And my take was this, that evolution needs to evolve. The theory of evolution
needs to evolve. Actually, one of the greatest of those, John Maynard Smith, totally agreed with that
view. In his later editions of The Theory of Evolution, which was his great textbook, he totally admitted
the symbiogenetic process that I described earlier, the coming together of two organisms to create
a new kind of organism, which I think is the vindication of Darwin's original attempt to use
hybridization to produce new species. So, you know, not all the modern synthesis were closed to the idea
of new developments. And I don't think they should feel that they have to resist the ideas that are
now clear, as themselves backed up by both the molecular biology and thinking through particularly
the genomic sequencing data. They formulated the simplest hypothesis that they could produce
in 1942. But we now know it's more complex and nobody needs to feel ashamed of that. I would love
Richard Dawkins to agree with me, if he could. You see, it doesn't change the fact that he produced a
brilliant exposition in 1976, when he wrote The Selfish Sheen, of the modern synthesis viewpoint. And I can only
develop what I'm developing as a physiologist looking at all of this by absorbing all of that, but then
say there's a bit more to it. And that bit more turns out to be quite a bit more. So I don't think I
should be interpreted as attacking the modern synthesis people. I think they were brilliant. And I've read
most of them carefully, even the original founders of the modern synthesis, I think they should feel,
well, science moves on. And that's how it always is. And it's what the physicists had to accept at the
beginning of the last century, that what we thought was a closed, clear exposition of the atomic basis of
matter turns out to be much more complex. And we still don't fully understand it because we haven't
got a way of somehow integrating our ideas of quantum mechanics with the ideas of relativity.
Einstein was worried about that, of course. And I think we all still are worried about the fact that
we can't produce, as it were, a theory, a consistent theory of everything in physics. And that's a big
problem. I think in relation to biology, though, it's time that we recognized that things have moved on.
And that if you unravel the molecular biological detail, what you find is the modern synthesis
view is simply too simplistic. There's more to it. And I think we should recognize that.
Yeah, I think here we can also take some of the conceptual questions. So,
but before that, like the examples that you mentioned, I can also kind of give a few more
examples. For example, horizontal gene transfer in bacteria. That's completely, it doesn't like go
from one generation to the other generation. It's simply, you know, that they are sharing DNA with
their friends and I don't know. When I first saw the two bacteria putting out tiny protrusions
connecting together. And then the protrusion contracting to bring them close together. What do they then do?
Well, I say they have sex. I mean that in the strict sense that they're exchanging DNA.
They, they have a whale of a time. I don't know whether they're conscious that they're having
a whale of time. I'd like think they are, but they, they exactly, this is the natural transfer
you're talking about. But you know, that's exactly what our bodies are doing now. We send little
particles, the vesicles packed with RNAs and DNAs to the germline. And now that's the same kind of
lateral transfer, not as it were vertical transfer, horizontal transfer. It's sometimes called, isn't it?
So yes, I think there are many other aspects of the issues of how organisms use DNA that need to be
taken into account. With regard to the passage of DNA from other organisms through to organisms like us,
we already know that our bacteria, meaning the bacteria in us, the gut bacteria, the surface skin
bacteria are also exchanging information with us. We depend on our gut bacteriums to an enormous degree.
They're signaling to us what we like to eat, which is what they like to digest. You know, when I first,
just to give a simple story as a student, I discovered the, when I was a student at University
College London way back in the 1950s, I discovered with some of my friends, the existence of a fantastic
Indian restaurant just near University College London. I started to enjoy highly spiced foods.
My bacteria did not initially agree. There were a few occasions I had an extraordinary Bangalore curry
and was paying the price for it later. But aggressively, somehow the bacteria in me evolved and actually
produced a gut microbiome that loved to have curries.
I even cook curries myself now. So we are also, as a community of an organism, because we cannot exist
without our gut bacteria, we would not be able to digest what we digest without them.
So it's absolutely essential to the integrity of us as organisms that we do that. But effectively, we are
directing their evolution by what we choose to eat. We're back to the peahen choosing the peacock. In this case,
we're not consciously choosing the bacteria we like to have, but in effect, we are sending messages to them
which means that they have to do to evolve. So I see that. So when you're saying that organisms can
affect their evolution or can drive their evolution, what do you mean by an organism here? Just a semantic
question, but... Yes, these are very difficult questions because what is a colony of bacteria?
Bacteria. You know, bacteria will produce films on a surface like the surface of water, for example.
And you might think, okay, there's several million individual bacteria there.
And you observe something very interesting in the film. You look at how it grows. And it does so
in a cyclic fashion. Sometimes it grows quite quickly, and then it comes to a period of stasis.
And then roughly the same period of time later, it starts to grow again, and stops. And then again,
then stops. Now, people who observed this said,
look, something must be being communicated. This, it's almost like an organism, that film of bacteria,
because it's operating as a group, as though it is, for the time being at least, while the bacteria are all
together in the film, it's acting as a unity. And we now know exactly what the message is. In effect, it's
it's a message that depends on ions, potassium ions, coming out from some of the cells at the center when
they're hungry, triggering a potassium wave that travels through the organism, through the fact that
transport processes in each of the bacteria, take potassium in or push potassium out, cause that
wave to travel to the edge of the film. In effect, the center of the film is communicated to the edge and
saying, we are hungry, don't grow too much yet. And that's what produces the cyclic process. So you see,
the question you're asking, is that film itself an organism? I don't know. But the question forces
itself before us, because clearly, organisms don't exist in isolation. And that's, that's true of us too.
We operate, in fact, famously do so, don't we? We operate in cooperation with other humans. We would
not be able individually to benefit from all the technological innovations that have produced modern
civilization if that were not the case. So if you ask the question, where am I? That's a deeply
oriental question, of course. The Indian Buddhists all those years ago had exactly that question. Where
is me? It's what produced the sense of no self, the Anatman idea, which is so deep into oriental philosophy.
I think it comes also with the question, where inside here? Or where indeed is me? I think I'm partly out there.
I don't exist independently of the relations I have with so many other people, and indeed with other organisms
than humans, because our interrelation with dogs, with cats, and so on, in the way in which we have
developed communal activities means that it gets very difficult to answer the question, what is an
organism? So I think you're right to ask the question. I suppose the answer is, we don't have to
produce a definitive answer. Coming back to that bacterial film. I think it is sometimes acting like
an organism in itself. But at other times, the film is dispersed and the bacteria are individual on
on their own again. And that applies to many life cycles in other organisms. The slime molds, that's
single cell organisms that sometimes form like the bacterial films into the slime, which we see moving
slowly and feeding. It's almost like a snail moving along. Well, a snail is, of course, a proper organism,
as we would define it. The slime mold is not in the sense that during its life cycle, what happens when
it, as an organism, as a big organism, it becomes hungry, it does something quite extraordinary.
It behaves like a plant. It puts out a stalk. And at the top of that stalk, there'll be something like
a mushroom cap. What does it do? Just like mushrooms, it releases spores. What then happens is the wind
carries those spores, and the slime mold can inhabit then a new environment. You can find places where it's
got water, where it's got food, and then it develops again into a slime mold. So even the same organism can
go through the process of being individual, the spores and the original cells that are developed from
those spores that become isolated cells that move around. But then they come together just as bacteria do
in films to produce the period of time for which it's better to say the slime mold itself is the organism.
And then when it's under stress, it goes back to the unicellular form. So I think that organisms like us
that developed that developed so well during, for example, the Cambrian explosion, as it's called about 500
million years ago, where the different forms of multicellular life rapidly diverge from each other,
we must have originated from that kind of temporary association, which then became, as it were, permanent.
We, of course, can't any longer. Our cells can't be separated out and become separate organisms, but can they?
You know, I come now to a very interesting experiments that Michael Levin has been doing.
He takes cells from a frog and he puts them in an environment. I think he takes them from the skin cells of the frog.
He cultivates them and they come together and form a new kind of organism.
He calls them xenobots. I don't think he invented that term, but they then act like organisms. They start
swimming through the growth cilia to make sure they can swim. So even the cells of multicellular organisms
can be separated out and, in his experiments, become effectively a new kind of organism.
So we're not totally incapable of ourselves doing that, going off on their own.
That's the way I think we should think about cancer.
This is a very big question, and naturally, as a medical scientist, I'm fascinated by the way
in which cancers develop. The standard story, of course, is the standard modern synthesis story.
You've got random mutations slowly accumulating, and eventually there's an overload of mutations,
and the cells start to wander off and become a cancer. I've no doubt that that is also true.
But the interesting thing is this. When you attack a metastatic cancerous development with
radiotherapy or chemotherapy, if it's very isolated still, not yet metastasized to the whole body,
because you can direct your radiation directly at that cancer as a discrete area,
or chemotherapy if, of course, it's metastasized too much and you've got to try and attack
the cancer in the body as a whole, then what you find is very interesting.
The organism within the organism, that is the cancer, knows that it's under attack.
And just like bacteria, when they're under attack by antibiotics or by radiation, or whatever it might
be, hypermutate, what we find is that the cancer cells hypermutate. They mutate rapidly, and I think
they're doing exactly like the immune system. They are, as it were, like an organism within the organism,
developing towards a state in which, in the end, they control the whole organism. And then, of course,
they and the organism die. So in the end, they don't achieve their aim. But it's an interesting
way of thinking about cancer, because I think we would need, if that is all correct, we'd need to
rethink how we look at the treatment of late stage cancer. We may actually, while killing the cancer
temporarily, we might also be producing more virulent forms that make it more difficult later,
which, of course, is why very often, although a cancer seems to have been cured, it will often start
to come back. So I think this new way of looking at the ability of organisms to partially at least direct
their own evolution produces really interesting insights into aspects of disease that we need very
much to try to deal with. And I was part of a group that some years ago, two or three years ago,
in fact, created a new organization within the biggest cancer organization in the world. That's the
American Association for Cancer Research, AACR. We formed a new group called the Cancer Evolution
Working Group, and it has become one of the fastest growing groups within that very large organization.
It has more than 10,000 members. It's a huge association of cancer specialists. The working
group I'm referring to grew very rapidly to at least 1,000 members. So I think there are very
practical applications of the new thinking that I'm proposing, and that others are too. I'm certainly not
alone in these ideas. And they have big practical consequences for some of the major diseases of
humanity. And that takes me to another problem which I've thought about very deeply recently. The big
outcome of genomics is not what was originally envisaged. Now that we've sequenced the genomes of hundreds of
thousands of humans, we haven't arrived at a new understanding of major diseases except for what are called the
genetic outliers, the genetic outliers, the diseases that are very clearly genetic in origin, cystic fibrosis and
similar diseases. For those, genomics has succeeded very much in identifying which genes are most strongly
correlated with the disease state. But for the great majority, you know, the association levels, that is the
correlation between the presence or absence of a gene and the presence or absence of a disease state is
actually very low. Now as a physiologist, I understand that perfectly. About 30 years ago, my research team
working in heart physiology found a very interesting result. You could identify a protein that helps to
create cardiac rhythm. So the rhythm continues about one beat per second all the way throughout life.
That particular protein contributes, we think, the largest fraction of the electric current that makes that
possible. You can block it. And when you block it, the change in frequency, it just continues on. It's come down a
little bit, but it didn't depend totally on the presence or absence of that gene or that protein. What that
shows, and this is universal in studies of this kind of gene knockout or protein block experiments as we would
call them, is that the organism, its networks of interactions are very robust. If a particular component
is missing, it just finds another way of doing the same function. And that's universally true. And I think
that's why the majority of the genomics investigations have found very small correlations, association levels,
as they're called, between a particular gene or its allele, and a particular form of disease.
Now, I think that's a very important finding. I applaud the genomics
groups for having discovered that. But we now need to do what is necessary.
That means that we cannot find the answer in genomics. We have to go to a higher level of
organisation and work out how those higher levels of organisation are managing to keep functioning,
whether or not particular genes are present. In the work that I've done on this, I've shown that
even a zero score between the presence or absence of a particular gene form and a disease state does not
mean it's got no causation. It may simply mean that that process in the body is so robust that even when
you knock it out, it continues nevertheless with no change. It can even be zero. And we know that because
in mice, you can knock out what's called the clock gene. That's what enables us to be a 24-hour rhythm
in many of our cell processes in the body. When there's light, you get one way, and when it's dark,
it goes another way. Now, you can knock out the first gene was found to be associated with
24-hour rhythm, so-called circadian rhythm, and it doesn't change the circadian rhythm. And again,
I would say that doesn't mean the clock gene is not involved in the 24-hour clock. It just means that the
system is beautifully robust and it can carry on even if that one is missing. But that's very important
because it means that in relation to studying disease states and how to cure them, we won't get
the answer from genomics alone. That's not to criticize the genomics people for producing the data.
By producing that data, we now know it isn't the answer. But it is to say we need to go further,
we need to go to a different way of thinking about those very complex diseases which are now
the great problem in societies that are sufficiently developed that many of us become old. And the
problem of longevity is a big problem. It won't be solved by genomics alone. It will need another way
of looking at the way organisms resist the presence or absence of particular genes.
Excellent. So in your work, you also talk a lot about metaphors. And I mean, we've been using many
metaphors. So let's kind of just summarize it in a way that so we started the conversation with DNA,
DNA as in a metaphor for genetic material. And of course, we know that there is a whole chemistry, etc.
And we've talked about, okay, that it is important, we are not saying or there is no one who is claiming
that DNA is not important, right? It is important, but there are also other things. And this is what
we've been talking about, what can be the other things, etc. And in terms of evolution, there is this
prevailing view that evolution is driven by accumulated changes in the DNA or the genetic material,
which again, is like your argument is that it's again, is not the only case, or it's not the case,
it's basically the other way around. That's right. And apart from this factor, then we can go on and
talk about that organisms can drive evolution. This is what is another point. Of course, we are not
clear what is an organism, it can be a bit grayish, because again, it's a metaphor. It works sometimes,
but there are cases where it doesn't work. And I think it's also the case with the life, right?
Once we try to define life, it's not like we can always define it as one or zero, it's again,
a continuum, right? In the same way, we can think of multicellularity, as you described, beautiful
examples with bacterial biofilms, etc. That it's again, that continuum, we can think of us as humans,
like a zygote or an embryo, or we can think of a fully grown human with 200 or something
differentiated cells, cells in the body, etc. Right? So, when we think of all these different
factors, of course, these are again, different scales, there are metaphors, we need to understand.
And what you are saying is that we have been focused a lot about genetics and DNA, we need to
move ahead, we need to look further now to understand disease, to understand longevity,
and all the different physiological aspects of life. That's right. Exactly so. And just to finish on the
question of metaphor, of course, one of the most powerful metaphors of all time, I would suggest,
is Richard Dawkins' invention of the self. Exactly. I enjoy discussing with Richard and we've
enjoyed interacting with each other for about 56 years. I was actually his thesis examiner, just amongst
other things. But the important thing here is very interesting indeed. The problem with metaphors is that
the question whether they are literal or just metaphors is not a simple question.
Obviously, a little chemical like DNA cannot itself be selfish. That's obvious. In that sense,
it's obvious that it is a metaphor. But it wasn't obvious to Richard when he first coined it. A philosopher
criticized his book in about three years after it was published, so about 1979,
1879, and referred in passing to this metaphor, the selfish gene. Richard wrote back in the same journal,
it was the journal Philosophy, three years after that, they said, well, that was no metaphor. I believe it is the
literal truth. Now, what he meant, of course, was that it's as though the gene is literally selfish because,
as he would put it, organisms are just temporary things that enable genes to survive. So you can think of it
that the gene that the gene is selfishly surviving. But then the question is, what's the only experiment you
could do to prove that? Well, you measure the frequency with which that gene occurs in subsequent
populations. Now, trouble with that is fundamental. No theory can make the main and possibly the only
prediction it makes that is the frequency of the gene in subsequent populations be the definition of why
it is what you've called it, that is selfish. That's a complete no in any philosophical analysis of theory
in science. You cannot make the central metaphor of a theory be at one and the same time a metaphor and literal.
It is a difficult issue, and philosophers have argued about this a lot in relation to metaphor.
If you keep switching between an idea being metaphorical and being literal, you're confusing. There is no way
that can be a consistent analysis of what is happening. I think, therefore, that at a very deep philosophical
level, there's something wrong with the selfish gene theory. If it had been interpreted only as metaphor,
I have no quarrel with it. Yes, it is as though the genes are keeping themselves in existence and
passing down the generations and manipulating organisms to enable them to do it. Taken just as metaphor,
in a sense, I have no quarrel with it. But as soon as it becomes as it was thought to be the literal
truth, which is why I think many people read his books to mean that, it becomes incorrect. So this
issue of metaphor in science is actually extremely important. The particle physicists, when they use
the concept of spin, for example, in describing particles, clearly do not mean that those particles
are doing what we normally think of as spinning. They're using the word spin in a new way. They will
readily admit that. They are giving the particles what they call spin characteristics. But these particles
are really waves. That's the conclusion of quantum mechanics. So you really can't think of it as literally
spin. But there, the metaphorical concept is so different from the literal that people don't get
really confused about this. When we hear particle physicists talking about that, we think, OK, they've
got a different use for the word spin. Well, in relation to selfish applied to genes, we should
realize the same. It's really giving a different use of the word selfish. And it's not the literal
use of the word. That's where we get confused. And that's why science needs to understand metaphors better.
Now, also the definition of the gene in his case, it's like any bit of length of the DNA, you know, like
it's not the standard definition that we have in molecular biology nowadays.
That is correct. Absolutely correct. Because after all, gene DNA is often distributed around the genome.
And you have the exons, which are the bits that are translated and they get brought together by
the later stages of production of the protein. There's even a gene called DSCAM, D-S-C-A-M,
that can have as many as 32,000 different ways in which the exons can be combined to produce an RNA
that enables the protein to be produced. No, that's absolutely correct. We have to be careful
about all of these metaphors in relation to genes. Since we are talking about the selfish gene argument,
and if this can drive evolution, let's, I think, replace selfish gene with DNA.
Okay. And then we can think of, because at the end, this is what matters. And the way I think of this
metaphor is that it works at this larger scale in a way. If you think of all the life forms and we think
that DNA is the code script, we can kind of think that, okay, in the, like at the, in this kind of
transitions, it does work out, right? Because evolution is, or the way we think is like the evolution of
the species and the changes that we have at the individual level, that's not in a way, like it
doesn't kind of explain that, that transition to a species. Right. So let's, let's kind of talk about
the, the, the major crux of the matter. Like how would we reach at a, at a species level transition
or how these kinds of variations that we are thinking or talking about, be it at DNA level,
because I think at DNA level, we can kind of explain those transitions, but how we can explain those
transition, transition at the organism level? I think we can track the transitions and that's
where genomics is very valuable and has been particularly valuable in evolutionary biology,
because you can track the trees or roots of life. And that is fantastic. The way in which Carl Woese
discovered the three, uh, the, uh, archaea being one of the three branches, uh, depended on genomics,
depended on doing DNA sequences. So tracking, I totally agree with, but I once did an interesting
calculation. DNA, of course, it's easy to digitize the information it's got. You've got three billion
and you can regard them as noughts and ones if you wish, and then you can replace it by a digital code.
And that's perfectly possible. So you can give it so many gigabytes of information.
Now I asked the question, what about the rest of the cell, the rest of the egg cell or sperm? You can
show that it's got at least as much information as that. It depends on what resolution you, uh, use to
characterize the highly complex organization of a single cell. And it's easy to show this at least
three billion bits. Now that is all inherited as well as the DNA. I sometimes do in lectures, uh,
get an impression of how big a cell really is. And I imagine that a nucleotide sitting here in the
nucleus in Oxford is, uh, at this sort of size, the size of my fist. The edge of the cell
in which it sits in the nucleus would be way up in Scotland, the other end of the United Kingdom,
a thousand miles away. Now that gives a scale, which makes one realize that if you needed to
digitize the whole of that structure, of course, it depends on the resolution in which you do it.
I think the resolution would be, it would have to be at least as good as to recognize the intracellular
organelles, the sarcoplasmic reticulum, as we call the network inside cells of membranes,
the various organelles and where they're situated. If you ask the question, how much information does
that have? It easily equates with that of the DNA. So I would always argue that there are two types of
information that are passed on to the next generation, the genomic information and the cell
information. Evolutionary biologists have recognized this for a long time. Maynard Smith, for example,
often refers to cytoplasmic inheritance. And even says in his books, you know,
lamarchism, that is the idea that the rest of the organism can communicate to the germline, is not so
ridiculous as it's sometimes made out. Because he realized that the organization of the cell
is itself inherited as well as the DNA. In the debate with Richard Dawkins last year,
he put this lovely idea forward, Dennis, we could recreate your genome and use it in 10,000 years to
recreate you. My answer was, which egg cell would you have to put that DNA in, in order to recreate me?
Would it be my mother's egg cell, in which it might, in which case it might be reasonably close to me?
Or would it be something else entirely, in which case it won't? And there is the big problem. So yes,
the information in DNA is extremely important. I regard it as a set of templates to enable proteins to
be made. But it's easy to calculate, as I've done in my publications, to show that the information in
the rest of the egg cell, and in the sperm too, is easily as much as that in DNA.
Yeah. And of course, it will also matter that what is you in that case, right? And since you were
talking about, like, creating self and... Well, I know, the question of what is me, you see,
I think I am also the product of my history. So to recreate me, you not only have to put that DNA
into my mother's egg cell. Unfortunately, those no longer exist. But even if they did,
and you try to recreate me, unless you allowed it to live the life history that I have lived,
it would not be me.
Yeah. So in Laplacian sense, it will be this Laplacian demon, right?
I see, yes.
Like, you will have to simulate each and every single particle in the universe to create.
Unfortunately, yes.
Which is, of course, why the AI people, in thinking about this, could you ever, as it were,
tele-transport all the information in me to recreate me somewhere else? Well, I think that's a pipe dream,
as we say in English. I don't think it will ever happen.
Yeah. But as an engineer and biochemist, I am quite interested in, like, synthetic life. And
I kind of also think that probably with the tools that we have, at least we should be able to
like start from the scratch, like to think that how we can put simple chemistry together to create
kind of a system which, which we can sustain in the, in the lab conditions.
Absolutely, Jitendra. I'm not opposed to that. I think we must try to do that and see how we can do it.
And that would be a very big contribution to the question of what was the origin of life? How did it
emerge from non-living systems? Totally agree with you. You need to do that. But you won't recreate
me in the process.
Exactly. But we need a starting point. That's the interesting part.
And then, then probably we can also understand more about how the organism itself, like if it's,
if what we create is an organism, how that can affect the subsequent generations, right?
Indeed so. Now, I applaud that attempt to deal with that. In fact, I'm one of the three judges
and a major prize being offered for the first person who can do that. Well, strictly speaking,
it's called the prize for the genetic code and working out how the genetic code could have arisen
naturally, but by a process that we recreate. So if you manage to do it, there's 10 million there.
Yeah. I mean, that's why I'm thinking that probably after my PhD, I need to pursue this. You know,
10 million is the goal.
So thank you so much for giving your time. This has been great. And thank you so much for sharing
the information and the kind of ideas that you have. I think we could discuss these problems for
several days. Exactly. Exactly. Still wouldn't be enough. Thank you so much. Take care.
My pleasure. Goodbye for now.
