The one interesting point I might make here is that for Deleuze, philosophy is a kind of a truth-making machine, right?
That's what philosophy does.
And for Badiou, it's absolutely not the case.
Philosophy has no claim to produce truths whatsoever.
In fact, philosophy is subordinate to the four areas of life that produce truths, right?
Politics, art, science, and love.
And philosophy can't exist without those truth procedures in those fields.
Philosophy doesn't have the ability to make its own truth.
It can adjudicate.
It can talk about how these truths can become possible, can be possible together, if you will, how they work with each other.
But it has no productivity of truth itself.
Yes, in fact, Professor, one point I wanted to ask from you was he calls it, I believe, a disaster when philosophy kind of becomes, it makes the mistake of becoming a truth procedure.
And I think he uses politics, for instance, here, where you have like a philosopher like Heidegger, who tries to use his philosophy to become a Nazi.
Or even in the case of Marxism, there's this notion of where you entangle philosophy with the truth procedure of politics.
And I'm curious just to, if you could kind of, you know, riff off that, really, why philosophy shouldn't get involved in this notion of truth procedures.
Yeah, well, first of all, the problem that he sees is one that he calls suturing.
There's a tendency of all sorts of philosophers.
Let's take Heidegger as, as a good example, to suture philosophy, meaning making a kind of a exclusive strong connection to one of the truth procedures.
So in the case of Heidegger, it's art or poetry primarily, right?
So for Heidegger, truth is something that poetry makes, right?
That poetry is a kind of a truth procedure, if you will.
But philosophy is fundamentally connected to the poetry truth procedures in exclusion of other possibilities in politics and science.
And again, with Heidegger, the anti-science impulse is most notorious, where Heidegger sees science as a kind of a domestication, you know, of a taming of knowledge, giving it claims of truth that it really can't make.
It's a kind of an ideology, even.
And technology in particular is the reduction of science to its essence.
So there's a kind of a positive and negative suturing of philosophy in Heidegger.
And for Bedouin, the problem is, you know, it's not that that poetry doesn't produce truths.
It's precisely poetry that is one of the truth procedures for Bedouin.
But if we get exclusively fixed on that one, right, if we suture it to that, then we lose the impossibility of all the truth procedures.
And without all of the truth procedures, philosophy is, if you will, lame.
It's not it's not using all of its, you know, its its possibilities of, you know, it's not able to talk about really why all of those truth procedures in a particular historical moment of time.
And it's always philosophy in a particular moment of time is possible is because it has an awareness of the truth procedures of all four of those fields and doesn't get somehow, you know, attached in a sort of artificial way to one over the others.
Interesting.
Interesting.
Is this similar to kind of the Hegelian notion of the, you know, the Isle of Minerva sets forth at the dawn of dusk and the notion that philosophy in some sense can only analyze the current condition and you can't really kind of predict what's to come and whatnot?
Is it along those lines or is Bedouin talking about something different?
I think that it's a good connection to make that in a sense, philosophy, the Aval of Minerva, right, only works after something else has happened.
And that something else is going to happen, you know, not necessarily as it is for Heidegger in terms of the history of philosophy or the history of religion, the history of culture, right, history of nations.
But it's going to happen in terms of, again, these fields of truth procedures in relationship to what he most famously calls an event, right?
Some kind of a disturbance in one of those fields that allows for the opening of something new, that allows for that underlying generic possibility to emerge, right?
So, yes, it's a kind of a retrospective kind of project that philosophy has, but it's a sort of an immediate retrospection, right?
It's in the present moment as it reflects back on the way that those other fields have produced truths, right?
Both historically, because this is not simply a presentist kind of notion of the production of truth.
Truth procedures always are a relationship to events, and events themselves form something like a history over time.
They resonate with each other, if you will, truth procedures in a particular field.
So, the events that we had in the past continue and are resonating with events that happen afterwards in politics or in art, right?
So, we can't simply talk about the French Revolution as an event without having some sense of its relationship to Spartacus, right, and the slave revolts that have preceded it.
So, in that sense, yeah, philosophy has a kind of a reflective quality that could be seen as like the owl of Minerva, right?
Secondary, if you will, to those productive fields of truth.
Yes, yes.
I mean, here, again, speaking of mathematics, he calls George Cantus the discovery of set theory.
That's the, he calls it the cantoe event, right?
And then how that kind of created something new in that regard.
Beautiful.
Exactly.
Yeah.
That event itself is not simply its own singular event, which it is.
It also resonates with the events in mathematics that go back to the ancient Greeks and that will continue later on with, you know, all the great thinkers, Paul Cohen and later thinkers who, if you will, constitute their own events.
