thanks everybody for being here and letting me share some some ideas with you if anybody's
interested in the details of it you can track them down at this website here's all the papers
the software the data sets everything here is where I put some more speculative kinds of things
where I talk about what I think the papers mean and so on so you're welcome to welcome to check
them out what I'm going to talk to you about today is kind of a weird topic I'm going to talk about
a little bit about AI and the right way to understand AI through the lens of collective
intelligence in other words we're going to take a kind of a deep dive into where minds come from so
that we can actually talk about this this notion of whether artificial minds have the same status
as biologically evolved ones and so on and so we're going to we're going to look at those kind of
questions so the main points of today what I what I'd like to do is is this we're going to look under
the hood of biology a little bit to kind of clear out some view viewpoints and some terminology that's
persisted with us for centuries basically but I think are going to have to change and this idea
of discrete natural kinds in biology so we'll talk about that we'll talk about diverse intelligence in
particular collective intelligence so very kind of unconventional minds and unconventional cognitive
systems and I'm going to argue that all the things that people argue about today in terms of artificial
intelligence are basically a kind of an off-ramp to a much deeper more difficult discussion about
the really deep philosophical questions about what we are about freedom of embodiment and things like
that it's actually much more it's a much more complicated set of questions than than just to focus on
kind of today's today's AIs and so we'll talk a little bit at the end about the ethics and the
future of humanity and things like that so let's let's start with with this this is a well-known
painting it's called Adam names the animals in the Garden of Eden and so so here he is so this is the
old Judeo-Christian story where where animals are showing up and Adam gets to name them now something
important about that story is that actually it was on Adam to name the animals God couldn't do it the
angels couldn't do it Adam was the one that had to name them I think that's a very interesting part of that
story and I think for us it has two lessons one that we're going to have to break I think as the future
moves on and the other one that's actually very deep and that we're going to have to dive into the part that
has to that has to be given up is this notion that all of these species are discrete they're natural kinds
everybody knows what each of each of these are they're separate from the others in fact Adam is also a discrete entity and
completely different from all of the others and and this at this idea that you can sort of a number and categorize very very
specific types of beings and and and that's and that's what they're it you can sort of count count them you know
count the the animals in your environment as you'll see in a minute I think that that that idea has to go but but what's deep is
this this notion that Adam because he is the one that has to live with them he is the one that has to give them names now in these old traditions giving something a name is the one that has to give them names
and these old traditions giving something a name was was it was very deep and spiritual it meant that you've discovered their true nature you know knowing the name of something means you know their their true nature and as I'm going to show you at the end of this talk because of synthetic biology and bioengineering and and some other disciplines we are going to have to name or discover the true nature of all kinds of unusual creatures that you guys will all be living in it with in your lifetime so so so let's let's let's let's start there while here's the part that that has to break so here's a
normal modern modern human lots of philosophy talks about the human mind you know does this and that and humans have responsibilities and rights and and all the interesting things but we know that now because of because of evolution and also because of developmental biology that this is not a sharp category in other words if you just track backwards in time you these modern humans are at the at a particular point in the evolution of a lineage that goes all the way back to single cell
organisms so if you have something to say about humans you might ask yourself well what about the humans of a couple hundred thousand years ago what about the hominids of a couple million years ago what about them and and and just understand that all these changes are slow and gradual and the same thing about development whatever you think is true of humans with their true hopes and dreams and cognitive responsibilities and so on at one point
very slow and very slow and gradual and so we know now that there's this continuum right it's not it's not just a discrete human but actually a whole continuum of forms that you might have to decide what is the status of these other forms not only that but there's this other continuum going horizontal here in my diagram where we know that humans are going to be modified and improved so for various health applications but also for augmentation technologies
watercolor used can go anywhere you might have to differ in the knowledge you might have torew unsolvenment
so you know why we knew that in an example we don't know that humans are going to be sejahtero and we have to do so but you mean Tobias veterinary
that will be made. And that's because at every level of organization in our bodies from
subcellular materials all the way up, you can introduce different kinds of novel engineered
components. And so all of this is now possible. And again, if you have thoughts about what a human
is versus what a machine is, you have to ask yourself, how are you going to distinguish this
when you are confronted with all sorts of beings along this continuum? You're going to need to
find ways to relate to them. And so one of the things that I've been working on for some years
now is a framework to be able to recognize, to create, and to ethically relate to truly diverse
intelligences that we can have relationships with regardless of their composition, meaning what
they're made of, or their origin story. Were they evolved? Did they come out of a factory or some
combination of those? And that means that we need to think about all of these things. So familiar
kinds of creatures like primates and birds and maybe an octopus and so on. But also all kinds
of weird organisms like colonial organisms, swarms, synthetic engineered new life forms, artificial
intelligences, whether robotic, meaning embodied, or pure software, AI, and maybe even someday aliens,
right? There's probably some sort of exobiological life form out there somewhere that at some point
we'll confront. Now, we need to be able to think about all of these in the same way, regardless of where
they came from or what they're made of. Now, I'm not the first person to try for this. So here's
Rosenbluth, Wiener, and Bigelow in 1943, trying for this scale all the way from passive matter,
so rocks and sand and things like that, all the way up to different kinds of active matter and then
various kinds of computational matter and agential materials, which is what I'm going to be talking
about today, all the way up to some sort of human metacognition, complex human kinds of minds and
beyond. And the goal of this kind of framework is not just, it's not philosophy. The goal is to,
first of all, move experimental work forward. So part of my framework is a very strong insistence
that when you look at something and you say, that's not real cognition, or that, you know, that is real,
you know, this thing really does have intelligence. The goal of this is not just to have philosophical
feelings about it. It's to have a toolkit for interacting with these systems that is beneficial,
that gives us new, brings new discoveries, new capabilities, biomedicine, engineering, and so on.
And also puts ethics on a better footing, because these old categories that we've had for a really
long time for how we deal with other beings are really not going to be of use anymore. And the details
are all here if you want to follow that. So a basic fact from developmental biology is that
we all make this amazing journey from what people call just physics. I really don't like that phrase,
but people use it. So just physics to a complex mind. So each of us started life here as a single
cell, a little blob of chemicals, and slowly and gradually, it became something like this, or even
something like this. So, you know, a complex metacognitive being who's going to say things about not being a
machine, and so on. This process is gradual. You need to understand developmental biology gives us
no magic bright line, at which point, boom, you know, you were just chemistry and physics, but bang,
there, there, that this is where the mind appears. There isn't anything like that. It's a very slow and
gradual process. And so what that means is that scientists and philosophers need to develop a story
of scaling. We need to understand how the properties of this thing, which follows the laws of chemistry and
physics, ends up being something that's also describable by the laws of psychology and psychoanalysis
and things like that. The reason that this is possible is because we are all made of an agential
material, unlike Legos and wood and metal and things like that, that basically just stay where you put
them. We are made of a material with agendas. And so this is the kind of thing we're made of. This is a
single cell. Okay. This is, this happens to be a free living organism called the lacrimaria. You can
see that it's extremely competent in its local unicellular goals. So there's no brain, there's no
nervous system, there are no stem cells, but this thing is doing everything it needs to maintain its
physiological, its metabolic and behavioral goals. So, so the first kind of shocking thing to some people
that, that, that you need to realize is that we are, we are all made of this interesting kind of stuff
that has its own agendas. I don't have time to tell you about it today, but the reality is these things
ourselves can learn. They can actually have pretty complex problem solving capacities in different
kinds of environments. And so we are a very interesting construction of a, of a very unusual type
material with which we are just now starting to learn how to engineer. But at least you might think
at least we are a true unified intelligence, right? So, so maybe you can call an ant colony some kind of
collective intelligence, but, but we have a, we have a brain where, you know, we, we feel like a single
unified being. So at least we are a true unified intelligence. And in fact, René Descartes really liked
the pineal gland because there's only one of them in the brain. And he thought that that's where
the, the, the, the, the human experience was centralized because, you know, there's no multiple,
multiple aspects of it. There's just one in the brain. But if he had had access to a microscope,
he would have discovered that inside this pineal gland is all this stuff. It's a bunch of cells.
And inside of each of those cells is all this stuff. Okay. There isn't one of anything in the
brain and all of us are collective intelligences. We are all made of parts that do things. And the,
and the real trick here again, is that scaling story is to tell a convincing,
to give a convincing account of how it is that all these parts give rise to something that is a
centralized, that, that has the feeling of being a centralized unified self. And so this is, this is
what, what my group works on. Now it's interesting that Alan Turing, who is basically the, the father
of modern computer science, he was, was very interested in, in machine intelligence and in
computation and, and, and programmability and things like this. But what, and so, so everybody knows,
knows that part. But one weird thing is that he also published this paper called the chemical basis
of morphogenesis, which was basically an attempt to understand how the chemicals of an embryo organize
into order from the, from their initial disorder. Now you might wonder why would a guy who's interested in
computation and intelligence and, and, and, and machine minds and things like that? Why, why would
he be studying the chemicals in an embryo? And I think that, although he didn't write about it,
I think that Turing saw a very profound truth, which is that the process by which bodies come to be in
this physical universe, right, by which your body was self-organized from a bunch of chemicals
in the oocyte, is very closely related in a profound way to the question of where minds come
from, right? So the origin of the self-assembly of your mind and of your body are very related stories,
even though, even though they're treated by completely different communities. So, so, so neuroscience
and, and the, you know, and the behavioral sciences versus developmental biology, molecular biology,
cell biology, typically those, those folks do not think they're studying the same thing.
And, and I think they're studying exactly the same thing, just in different, different components.
So, so to, to, to look a little further into where, where we come from. So this is a, a, an embryonic
blastoderm. So that's basically a flat sheet of cells. So in the, in the beginning, what will happen
is that the egg will get fertilized, it will divide, and then eventually flatten out and give,
and give rise to, at least in amniotes like us, it will give rise to a flat sheet of cells. So you can
think about like a little, a little disc or something like that. That's just a couple cell
layers thick. And so, so here's your disc. And so let's, let's just imagine there's about 50,000
cells at this point in this disc. And we look at it and we say, ah, there's an embryo, maybe a human
embryo or a mouse embryo or something. Actually, mice have a different structure than this. They're
kind of weird, but let's say rabbit. So human or rabbit or, or some other amniotes. You look at that
and you say, there's one embryo, but there's 50,000 cells. What are you actually counting when you say
there's one embryo? Well, what you're counting is you're, you're really counting alignment. You're
counting the fact that all of those cells are committed to the same story of what they're going
to do in, in, in anatomical space. They're all going to collaborate to build a very particular
kind of, of embryo. They are all connected together and they are all going to cooperate to do one
specific thing, which is to build that. That's what make this an embryo. What makes this an embryo
is that all of these cells are committed to the same plan. Um, that doesn't have to be the case.
And so, so this is some work that, uh, that was first done in the forties. I did it again. And
when I was a grad student, um, in 96 or so, uh, when you take a duck embryo and you, uh, use a little
needle to scratch some, uh, some, um, some scratches into it like that, what you'll see is these, these
little islands here for the next few hours before they rejoin again, each of these islands doesn't
realize the other one is there. So what they do is they self-organize a new embryo. Each one of them
thinks they're the only one. So they make an embryo. And when they do heal up, you end up with
this kind of, uh, conjoined twin or triplet. Um, you end up with a few, a few, a few, uh, individual
animals coming out of the same, uh, the same blastoderm. So, so the question of how many beings,
how many selves are actually in an embryo is tricky. It's not fixed by the genetics. It's anywhere from
zero to probably half a dozen or more, depending on what happens. The, the selves arise in this
medium, this, the cellular blastoderm, uh, in real time, uh, as a, as a process of physiology,
they are not, it's not hard coded. Uh, and, uh, and, and, and what that means is that a self
has to put itself together. It has to, uh, figure out a border between itself and the outside world.
So, so here's, you know, three embryonic fields sitting there. Each of these cells has to decide,
am I part of this one or am I part of that one? Or, or who am I part of? Um, and this kind of
thing, this medium that can fragment or, uh, or come together to form some number of coherent
individuals is not just for development. This happens in the brain as well. So we have, uh,
split brain patients that have a, um, a cut between their, uh, their two hemispheres that actually end
up having, uh, you, you then find out that they have actually in, in an important sense, there are two
individuals, uh, in there that have different opinions and so on. You can have lots of, uh,
dissociative identity disorders and, and various other phenomena that make it clear that it's,
it's not so simple as the brain has one, uh, one, uh, cognitive owner and the body has, um,
you know, one, uh, is, is one embryo. It's actually not, not that simple. And you, you, you learn about
this when you think about something like this. So, so here's a rat and you train the rat to press the
lever and get a delicious reward. But the thing is that, uh, there are cells in this rat that interact
with the lever, there are cells in his gut that get the sugar, but there is no single cell that has
both experiences. So who is it that owns this, this, um, associative memory, the fact that the pellet is
associated with pressing the lever? Who owns that? Well, the owner of that memory is not any individual
cell. It's the entire rat. It has to be because no cell has that experience. And, uh, there's a,
there's a, there's a kind of cognitive glue that operates in this rat, which we know as, as the nervous
system, which allows the rat to know things the individual cells don't know, such as that these
two facts are, um, are connected. So that cognitive glue is a, is a very interesting thing. And we're
going to study that, uh, more of that momentarily. Um, but, um, but I want to be clear that, uh, these
animals that you typically, you typically hear about are, uh, not the only game in town as far as some,
some very interesting aspects of what the biology is trying to tell you. I'm going to show you a couple
of these examples just to sort of, uh, uh, expand our horizons about what, what we need to understand.
So, so here's a caterpillar. This caterpillar lives in a two-dimensional world. It's a soft-bodied
creature. It has a controller, a specific brain that's very well suited for driving this kind of
soft body around. Um, but it needs to turn into this. This is a flying, uh, kind of creature with,
with hard elements. And, uh, uh, the brain basically in, you know, during this metamorphosis process,
when the caterpillar turns into the butterfly, what happens is that, uh, the brain is pretty
much dissolved. So, so most of the connections are broken. Most of the cells are killed off,
huge refactoring, remodeling, new cells, new brain is built quite different, uh, and there's your
butterfly. But so, so that already is, is, is kind of amazing. And you can imagine, you know, the sort
of, um, philosophical question of, uh, what's it, what's it like? Nevermind. What's it like to be a
caterpillar? What's it like to be a caterpillar changing into butterfly, into a butterfly in real time,
not just on an evolutionary timescale, but in your lifetime drastically, you know, nevermind puberty.
This is, you know, this is, this is a major change. Um, so that's, that's the first thing.
But the second thing is that it turns out that, uh, memories persist through this process. So a
caterpillar that learns something, uh, will still remember it as a butterfly. So that's, that's amazing.
How, how do memories persist when the brain is basically getting radically refactored? But it's
even more than that, because, uh, well, let's say, um, what they, what they did was to train
caterpillars to, uh, look for, for leaves at a particular color disc. Um, that kind of information
is completely useless to the butterfly because first of all, the butterfly doesn't crawl, it flies,
and also it doesn't eat leaves. So this process has to be, uh, not just the storage of memory,
it has to actively remap from, uh, from, from what's important to the caterpillar to what's important
to the butterfly. It has to generalize from the concept of leaves to the concept of food
and from specific crawling motions that you might think is what this simple animal is remembering
to something much more complex, a navigational process that will actually be implemented by
flying here by, by, by completely different muscles and a different architecture. So, so this,
so this radical process of, of change, and you might, you might think about what happens
to the individual identity of this organism and, uh, you know, if, if, what, what it would
be like if the, if the caterpillar knew what was coming and said, well, you're going to
change radically, but, but don't worry, you'll still have some of your memories. It's just
your priorities will be different. You love leaves now, but you're not going to care about
leaves at all later, and you'll want this weird nectar. Um, you know, what, what, what,
what is that like? And, and we'll come back to this at the end of the talk. Uh, how would
you convince a creature like this, that this is a perfectly fine thing for them to go through?
And are they still here? Is that, is this organism actually still here by the time you get to
this stage? And, and because, because, and the reason this is important for us is because, uh, humanity
is going to change, um, in a, in a way that's, uh, that's somewhat reminiscent of this. So
that's, that's one kind of example. Another example are these, these are amazing creatures
called planaria, uh, they're flatworms. And, uh, when you train them to expect food on these
little bumpy circles, they, uh, will remember. And if you cut off their heads with their brain,
the tail will sit there doing nothing. Eventually the tail will regrow a brand new head. So they
regenerate every, every piece will regenerate. And eventually when they regenerate, you find that
they still remember the original information. Um, so the memory, not only does this tell you that
the memory can be stored outside the brain, but also that it can be imprinted onto a new brain
as the brain develops. So the movement of memories through tissues. So all of this is, is, is possible
because we have this amazing multi-scale competency architecture at every, uh, scale in your body from,
from the molecular networks, uh, to the, um, uh, organs and tissues and, and even groups,
these different layers are not just, uh, biological scales, but, but actually they're, they're, they have
the ability to solve problems. In other words, they have competencies in different spaces in the
space of possible gene expressions and physiological states and, uh, anatomical, uh, um, uh, layouts.
All of these things have, have, uh, the ability to solve problems. Um, I don't have time to show you a
whole bunch of, uh, examples today, but, but there are some amazing examples of, of these things, uh,
solving various problems. Now, the thing to keep in mind is that we humans are pretty terrible at
detecting, uh, intelligence. I mean, we do okay with middle-sized objects moving at medium speeds
in three-dimensional space, you know, crows and birds and, and, and, and maybe a dolphin or something
like that. You know, we can, we can kind of, um, uh, we can kind of recognize those as intelligence,
but there are other spaces in which, uh, complex creatures navigate and, uh, and, uh, spend effort and
try to achieve goals and, and, and so on. Uh, there are gene expression spaces and physiological spaces.
I want to focus today on what's known as anatomical morphous space. It's just basically the, the, a high,
um, a multi-dimensional space of all the different shapes that any structure can have. So in this
particular case, here's a, here's a, a planarian head and can have different shapes and these
different shapes correspond to the different settings of these two control knobs. And so you have
this, uh, this two-dimensional space that shows you where all the different planaria shapes are.
But this is the, I mean, the actuality is for, for, for complex organisms, a very high dimensional
space. So what I want to look at is, uh, I've told you that we're all made of, of, of cells,
that these cells underlie the emergence or the self-assembly of, of, of, of a, of a unified
self, both of, um, uh, cognitively and, uh, and, and, uh, morphologically. And I want to look at
how that works. So, so here we are, we start, start life as a, uh, collection of, uh, embryonic
cells. This is a cross-section through a human torso. So just imagine, um, where does this
incredible order come from? The structure, everything is in the right place, the right
shape, the right size, relative, you know, next to the right thing. Where does this order
come from? And at that point, even, I mean, I've given a version of this talk to middle
schoolers and even, uh, nine-year-olds will immediately say, uh, well, it's in the genome.
We know where it is. It's in the, it's in the human genome. But of course, we can read
genomes now and we know that that isn't what the genome, uh, specifies at all. The genome
talks about proteins. The genome specifies the, the tiny molecular hardware that every
cell gets to have. This isn't directly in the genome any more than the structure of a
termite nest or the shape of a, uh, spider web is in the genome of those species. All of this
is the outcome of physiology and behavior. It's the outcome of these cells doing their thing
with the hardware that they've been given by their genetics. So if the DNA specifies,
uh, the hardware, how do these cells actually know what to build? How do they know when to
stop? If we want to convince them to repair something that's been damaged, how do we communicate
that to them? And as engineers, we can ask, uh, actually what else is possible? What else
could we convince them to build? Same exact hardware, but what, what, what, what more could
they build? So, um, uh, I want to give you a couple of examples of, uh, the amazing nature
of this process, because see, when you, when you look at this, you might think that, well,
the biggest thing this thing has going for it is reliability. That basically it happens
the same every single time. And that's true. Reliability is, is, is amazing here, but I want
to show you that it's actually much more than that. Um, what you're looking at here is the
cross section of a little tubule, uh, leading to the kidneys of a, of a, a sow matter. And,
uh, normally there's about eight to 10 of these that, uh, eight to 10 of these cells that work
together and they form this little, this little structure with a space in the middle. You can do
this weird trick where you, uh, cause multiple copies of the, of the genetic material to build
up in the, uh, very early embryo. And so when that happens, you still get a normal animal and
it's normal size, but the cells are bigger. And when you, when you take a cross section,
you find out that, well, the cells are bigger. And so now fewer of them created the same kind
of lumen. So, so, so let's, let's, uh, see where we are so far. Uh, multiple copies of your
chromosome, uh, no problem, uh, weird cell size, no problem. Cause you'll scale it to the number of
cells. And most of all, if you make truly gigantic cells and you do these, these are, I think five N or
six N polyploid newts. When you do this, one single cell bends around itself to give you
the exact same kind of structure. Now that's remarkable because this is a different molecular
mechanism. This is cell to cell communication. This is some sort of cytoskeletal bending. And
so what this means is that in the service of a particular high level anatomical structure,
these, uh, these cells can call on different molecular mechanisms to solve their problem.
Okay. So, so they're using different tools in their toolkit to get to where they're going. That
is a very good definition of intelligence to reuse the affordances you have in the service of a goal,
uh, when things change. So when you're a salamander coming into the world, you don't know how many
copies of your genetic material you're going to have. You don't know, uh, how many cells you're
going to have or what, uh, what the cell, what the size of the cells are going to be. You still need
to be able to get the job done. So this is not a matter of just being reliable with the, uh, with
fixed parts. This is the idea that what evolution is making is problem solving agents. It's making a
system that is ready for many, many unexpected things. And not just environment, not just when
somebody bites your leg off and the salamander regenerates it. No, this is unreliability of
your own parts. This is not even being sure of what you're made of. You really can't depend
on much. And that's, that's an amazing thing. And it's quite different than what you normally
get in a biology curriculum where they tell you that your genome, the purpose of your, of
your genome is to, is to, uh, carry information from a long time away with maximal fidelity and
to minimize, uh, minimize errors. And, and, and every cell is going to do whatever the genome says.
And in the end, you get this emergent, uh, thing actually hitting that's, that's not at
all. What's, what's, what's happening here. Um, here's another, here's another example.
We discovered this a few years ago. Uh, these tadpoles, um, need to become frogs in order for
this tadpole, uh, face to make a frog face, all the organs have to move. So the eyes have
to move, the jaws have to move, um, and so on. Uh, and they normally do this quite reliably,
but it was thought to be a hardwired process. You know, people thought that, well, every organ just
moves in the right direction, this fixed amount, and that's it. Um, what we did was we created
these so-called Picasso frogs because we wanted to test how, how much intelligence is actually
in that process. How much, what kind of problems can it solve? So we scrambled everything. Um,
you can see here, the eyes on the top of the head, the mouth is off to the side, everything
is just a complete mess. And these guys still become normal frogs because all of these organs
will move now in novel paths, paths that these guys don't do, uh, until they get to a correct
frog face and then they stop. And so what evolution actually has given you is not a hardwired, uh,
set of, uh, set of instructions, but a system for error minimization. Okay. For a way of, uh,
wherever you, you happen to start out, do whatever you have to do to end up in this particular,
uh, location. This is, this again, this kind of goal directedness is something else that,
um, you're not going to see in your, uh, in your developmental biology textbook. Uh, this is,
this is not emergence and this is not, um, simply an increase of complexity. This is problem solving.
And that raises an obvious question, uh, about how does it know what the correct face looks like?
Where is the memory for that, um, that, that set point of that homeostatic process? Um, I'll show
you a couple of other things, uh, related to the plasticity of this. So just so you get, you
understand how, how, how much, uh, play there is between the fixed hardware of your genetics and
the actual outcomes. First of all, this here, uh, you might think this is a Photoshop or something.
I didn't believe it the first time I saw it, but this, this fly is running a stripped down, uh,
ant morphogenetic program on its wings. It's running a virtual ant on its, on its wings. And,
and the idea is that it, it wiggles, uh, it wiggles its, um, its wings to simulate these ants
scurrying about and that keeps the, um, predators away because they don't want to deal with, with ants.
And, um, this is, uh, this is, this is amazing of course, and it's, and it's striking that,
that it has this pattern, but it's no more striking than the, than the much more, uh,
intricate pattern of the actual fly. I mean, all of these are specific, uh, uh, morphogenetic
patterns, whether 2D or 3D carried out on this, uh, on this kind of hardware. And you might think
that, um, the outcomes are pretty fixed. I mean, here's, here's an acorn and you know that all
the time what these acorns give rise to is these oak leaves. And you might think that,
you know what the oak genome, um, actually does. It, um, it encodes this particular shape,
but along comes a bioengineer, and this is a non-human bioengineer. This is a little wasp.
And what these wasps do is they provide some signals that prompt, uh, uh, the, the rest of the,
um, the rest of the tissue to build something like this. Okay. They're, they're hacking the
morphogenetic competencies of this leaf. They're not changing the genome. Uh, and, uh, what they're
doing is providing some instructions that cause the leaf cells to adopt a different, uh, set point
in anatomical space. Now, would you ever have any idea looking at these flat green leaves, uh, and
how reliable they are? Would you have any idea that they're capable of building something like this?
I mean, we have no idea. So that just reminds us that this whole notion of, um, developmental constraint
is really probably a constraint in our thinking. It's not a constraint in the biology. Uh, the option
space for morphogenesis is enormous. And, uh, what we need to do is to discover the, the prompts,
the, the language that we can use to get them to build other things. And it clearly doesn't require
modifying the hardware and the genetics of this, of this thing are still, are still, uh, completely
intact. So, uh, now comes, uh, kind of the, the, the meat of the talk, which is that, um, if morphogenesis
is the behavior of a collective intelligence operating in anatomical space, that's what I've been,
um, uh, getting at, uh, for, you know, for, uh, for, uh, for the last few slides is the idea that,
that the, the, the, the, the act of creating complex anatomical shapes is really behavior.
It's behavior in a, in an anatomical space of possibilities. And it's done by a collective
intelligence, uh, which just like us, we're all collective intelligences, but that a collective
intelligence thinks about shape as opposed to moving around in 3d space. So now we need to ask,
how do we communicate with that intelligence? I mean, the wasp did it through, through, uh, you know,
millions of years of evolution. We would like to do it faster. Um, and where does it store its
memories? So these are some things that we've been, um, we've been looking at. Well, we know that
one way to store memories and, uh, communicate, uh, with a, uh, collective intelligence is, is through
the nervous system. Now the nervous system does it via, uh, via computations in an electrical
network. Um, and you can actually try to decode those. This is the, um, the work of people doing a
neural decoding to try to read the electrical electrical activity of the brain and to know
what thoughts and preferences and memories and so on, uh, the system has. Well, it turns out that,
uh, this, this system, this, this ability to store memories in an electrical network, to use an
electrical network, to integrate information across many, many, many cells, both in space and in time
is something that evolution discovered a really long time ago. It is way older than nerve and muscle.
Um, bacterial, um, bacterial biofilms were probably the first to do this. So, so long predating
multicellularity. Uh, and what we've, what we've done is to develop some of the first tools to read
and write the mind of the collective intelligence of your body. So, so by taking a lot of the concepts
from neuroscientists and really, uh, emphasizing this idea that neuroscience isn't about neurons at all.
Neuroscience is really about scaling of information from tiny competent subunits into much larger
coherent selves that have higher intelligence in other spaces. That's really what, what this is
about. And, and, and that doesn't just work in the brain that works in your entire body.
So the first thing I want to show you is, uh, some of the techniques, uh, that, that can be used. Uh,
one thing we have is, is this, uh, this thing we develop called voltage sensitive fluorescent dye
imaging. And that means that without having to poke the cells with electrodes, you can get in real
time, this is a time-lapse of a frog embryo. This is a frog putting its face together.
You can get a map of all the electrical states and thus you can learn, you can try to learn to decode
what the system is trying to build. What, what are the, uh, the computations that they're doing?
This, this, we call this the electric face. This is a, a bioelectric, um, map of, of, of the, uh,
of the face ectoderm long before any of these organs actually appear. You can see that cells already
know, here's where we're going to place the eye. Uh, this eye, the left eye actually comes in a little bit
later. Um, here's where the mouth is going to go here, the placodes it, this, this is, you are
literally seeing the way you would with a brain scan. You are literally seeing the, uh, content of
the collective intelligence of, uh, morphogenesis, um, in, in the body of these, uh, of these animals.
Um, so this, these are normal patterns. In fact, these are required for normal development,
uh, as I'll show you momentarily, but, but here's a pathological pattern. And this is induced by
injecting a human oncogene into these, uh, into these embryos, which eventually will make a tumor.
But these tumors have an aberrant bioelectrical profile because what happens, the first thing
that happens with this, with this oncogene is that it causes an electrical disconnection, uh, from cells
from their, um, from their environment. And when cells disconnect, they immediately lose the ability
to remember these large, uh, grandiose goals that they were working on. So making, you know, complex organs
and fixing defects and so on. Uh, they're just amoebas now, you know, that boundary between self
and world has now shrunk that cognitive light cone, where before the goal was the size of a,
of an organ or, or maybe the whole organism. Now it's down to the size of a single cell and to them,
the rest of the body is just environment now. Okay. So this is metastasis, this is where you get
metastasis and, and, and progression, because as far as they're concerned, they're just amoebas living,
living in a, in a, in an environment, uh, and they go where they want and they reproduce as much as
they want. And so, so once you understand that you can, you can try for a really interesting,
uh, cancer therapeutics, which is what we're doing in our lab. Um, don't try to kill the cells with
toxic chemotherapy. What if we re-inflate their sense of self? What if we reconnect them, forcibly
reconnect them to the large electrical network that can remember what a proper organ is. And so when you
do that, so, so this is, this is the same animal. Here's the, the oncoprotein has this red fluorescence
on it. You can see it's, it's blazingly strongly expressed. In fact, it's all over the place,
but there's no tumor and there's no tumor because we co-injected an ion channel that modulates,
uh, it's an, it's an RNA that modulates the electrical property of the cell to force them
to remain in connection despite what the oncogene is saying. And after that, it doesn't matter that
they, that they have this genetic defect, uh, they behave appropriately and they build nice organs
and so on. So, so that, so that's a story at the level of single cells, how you, how you scale,
uh, individual cells into a kind of a larger, um, larger, uh, set of, uh, set of goals. But I want
to show you, uh, something, something even, even, uh, kind of, uh, larger scale than that, which is
we, we saw in that electric face, there's a little, um, there's a little, uh, eye spot, which tells the,
the animal that that's where the eye is going to go. So we can ask a simple question. What happens if
you, if you, if you reproduce that bioelectric pattern somewhere else, can you tell this, uh,
this group of cells to build an eye somewhere else? And it turns out you can. Here it is. We
injected some potassium ion channel RNA into a location that normally would make a gut. So here's
this, uh, this is a tadpole. Here's the mouth. Here's the eye. Here's the gut. Um, and, and if you
tell these cells using an appropriate voltage signal that, hey, you should be making an eye, boom,
that's what they do. And these eyes have normal lens, right? And the optic nerve, all the same
stuff. And, and you, uh, you might see in your developmental biology textbook that only, uh,
cells in the anterior neorectoderm here are competent to make eye. So that isn't true. That's
only true if you try to prompt them with the so-called master eye gene. So if you put in PAC6,
the master eye gene, yes, that's true. Only these cells can do it. But again, that limitation of
competency isn't in the embryo that that's on us. That's because we didn't know, uh, the community
didn't know the right way to talk to these cells. Once you understand the bioelectric code,
actually, it turns out that almost any region in this embryo is competent to make eye. And if you
should happen to only inject a few cells. So here, this is a lens sitting out in the tail of a tadpole
somewhere. If you only inject a few cells, these, these blue cells are the ones we injected, then
they know there's not enough of them to make a good eye. So what do they do? They recruit a bunch of
their neighbors to work with them to make an eye, just like ants and termites will recruit their
buddies to solve a problem. So, so now you can see that, uh, that what we're doing is providing
signals. We didn't tell these cells how to build an eye. We didn't say anything about the stem cells
or the gene expression. We have no idea how to build an eye. What we did find was a message that
we can transmit through this bioelectrical interface that says build an eye here. And once you get the
cells buy-in so that they are convinced that that in fact is what they should be building after that,
you don't need to do anything. They will, they will do what they do best. They'll, they'll, uh, build to a
morphogenetic spec. Um, we, we know this, uh, I want to show you, uh, there's just a couple of
things left here. Uh, I want to show you another kind of pattern memory in these planaria. So here's
a, here's a, uh, a normal flatworm. These guys, you can cut them into pieces and they will always,
uh, regenerate correctly. So, so every piece normally makes a nice one headed worm a hundred percent of the
time, but there's a bioelectric pattern there that we were able to read out and then we were able to
modify it. And when you modify that pattern, you make two headed worms. And when you make these two
headed worms, uh, what happens is that you have rewritten the memory of what a correct worm is
supposed to look like. So that when these fragments, when these middle fragments go to regenerate,
they consult the pattern to say what, what should a normal worm look like. They see that it says two
heads and they go ahead and they build two heads. These two headed worms now in plain water, meaning no
more manipulation of any kind, um, are now forever two headed. If you keep cutting them, they will just
continue to regenerate as two headed. We have permanently changed the target morphology, the pattern to
which they regenerate, but we never touched the DNA. There's nothing wrong with the genetics here. If we
were to throw these guys into the Charles river, a hundred years later, some scientists would come
along. They scoop up some single headed worms and some double headed worms. They'd say, oh, cool, a
speciation event. Let's sequence the genome and see what, uh, see what made the difference. There's nothing
wrong with their genome. That's not where the information is. And so that's really important
that, to understand that, uh, much as we've been learning from computer science for, you know,
a really long time now, uh, the hardware, if it's good hardware, does not fully, uh, constrain what the
software is able to do. And so this is a kind of pattern memory. It's long-term stable. Um, it's
rewritable because we can turn these guys back to one headed. Here you can see what, uh, you can see what,
what these two headed guys are doing when they, um, when they're hanging out. And so the, so the question
of how many heads should a planarian have is not, uh, it's not, uh, written in the DNA. What is
written in the DNA is the construction of, uh, uh, uh, some biological material that by default
will develop a pattern memory that says one head. So that's what it does by default, very reliably,
but you can change it. You can rewrite it. And the fact that biological tissue is reprogrammable
in this way is hugely important for biomedicine and for other things. And so I hope you're, you're
starting to, to, to, to see that, that all the emphasis on, uh, uh, on, on genetics and, and on
the genome and all that, that's, it, it, it's all very important because you have to understand your
hardware, but it's just the beginning. It's the same, uh, the, the, you know, the reason that on
your laptop, if you want to switch from Photoshop to Microsoft Word, you don't get out your soldering
iron and start, start rewiring, right? Because it's reprogrammable. Uh, neither does biology. Biology,
uh, is, is using a, an incredibly, um, reprogrammable medium that solves problems and can be communicated
with using various interfaces. For example, this bioelectrical interface. So, uh, we've talked
about, um, the reliability of development and what, uh, things do by default. We've talked about
various ways to hack, communicate with, uh, and, and reprogram the, um, the collective intelligence
of cells so they can build other variants on the form. But where do these goals actually come from?
So, so, you know, when, when we called up a second head here, the second head looks just
like the first head, you know, where are these patterns really? If it's not in the DNA, uh,
what, what, what, what, what, what's the space of possible patterns? What else, what else can
we do? And by the way, I didn't show you, but we can actually turn this into, uh, turn these
worms into, uh, heads of other species, about a hundred to 150 million years distance. So, you
know, triangular worms become round, become flat. You can, you can throw, but you can make the
hardware go to other regions of that space that normally belong to other species.
But, um, but okay, those are all evolutionarily, uh, defined forms. Uh, is, is that, is that
it? Is that where the forms come from? They're basically, um, you know, selected for, and then,
uh, they, there's a, there's a finite set of forms that can be, that can be, uh, implemented
by the hardware. Well, we decided to, to, to look at this in a synthetic kind of bioengineering
way. And, um, what we did was we took some cells, uh, some skin cells from, from frog
embryos, and we let them kind of reboot their multicellularity. We, we, we took them aside,
we liberated them from their normal, uh, interactions with other cells. And what they did, they could
have done many things. They could have died. They could have, uh, crawled away from each
other. They could have flat, made a flat monolayer like, uh, like cell culture. What they did instead
is they merged into something we then named Xenobots. Xenobot because Xenopus laevis is the
name of the frog. And we think this is a biorobotics platform. So they start to swim. Uh, they have
little cilia, little hairs that are normally used to distribute mucus down the side of the
frog, but here they row. So these guys are rowing to the left. These cells are rowing to the right.
And as a result, this thing moves forward. They can go in circles like this. They can kind of patrol
back and forth like that. They have various collective behaviors. These two are sort of dancing
around. This one's going on some sort of long journey. These ones are doing nothing. Uh, they
have some very rich, uh, calcium signaling. You can see that here, which is usually a sign
of some, uh, information processing that's going on in these, in these cells. Um, here's
one that, uh, is navigating this maze. So it's going to take this corner without bumping into
the opposite wall. So, so there it is. It bumps. And then here spontaneously, for some reason
that we don't know, it, it turns around, goes back where it came from. It has spontaneous
behavior. Again, remember, this is just skin. This is, uh, this is, these are, these are
just, uh, epithelial cells. And, uh, the, they have, they have lots of interesting, uh, lots
of interesting behaviors that, that we can talk about. Um, but one of the most amazing
things they do is called kinematic replication. So just imagine we've, we've made it completely
impossible for these things to reproduce the normal, uh, froggy fashion. They don't have
any of the reproductive organs. They don't have any of that. But, uh, in this novel
configuration, they figured out a way to make copies of themselves. And here's how they
do it. If you provide them with loose skin cells, this loose material, what they do is
they run around and they come and they sort of collect those loose skin cells into little
balls like this. And because what they're working with is an agential material, meaning
these are not passive pellets. These are cells for the same reason that we were able to make
Xenobots. They make the second generation of Xenobots and these little balls that they make
mature. And guess what they do? They run around and make the next generation of Xenobots and
so on. And this is kinematic replication. Um, it's kind of von Neumann's dream of a robot
that went around and made copies of itself from materials it finds in the environment.
I mean, just think this, uh, there's never been any Xenobots. There's never been any selection
to be a good Xenobot. This is not in the lineage of, uh, of frogs. Um, where does this come from?
Their shape, their behaviors, the kinematic self-replication, all the other things they
can do. Where does that come from? Uh, it's very hard to say that, uh, that, that this was the,
the, the subject of selection. So again, I come back to, uh, this, this theme that while the hardware
was absolutely selected for, I don't think it was selected to make frogs. I don't think that what
evolution does is create solutions for specific problems or things that are fit in a specific
environment. I think that what evolution does is make creative problem solving agents that
they'll do the same thing under default conditions. But once, uh, you start making changes and
challenging them, they often rise to the occasion and, uh, solve problems in, in very novel, uh, ways
that, uh, reflect dynamics that, that have, they've not seen before. And, and, uh, unless you think
this is some, uh, some, some trick of, um, you know, unique to frogs or embryos. I mean,
when we first published all this stuff, some people said, well, uh, frogs, amphibians are pretty
plastic and embryos are especially plastic. So maybe this is some kind of, uh, specific thing in,
in, in frog embryology. So, um, the last thing I want to show you is this. Um, so, uh, here's,
here's this little guy running around and I will ask you, uh, what this is. And you might think that
this is something I got off the bottom of a pond somewhere, right? Some sort of primitive organism.
And then I can tell you that, well, uh, we've sequenced its genome and you'll say, oh, what's
the, uh, what's the genome? What does it look like? And I'll say, well, this is a hundred percent
homo sapiens. These are adult human cells. There's no embryonics here. Um, and this is, this is adult,
uh, tracheal cells taken from, uh, human donors, most of them elderly in their seventies and eighties.
And, uh, when given the chance, they reboot themselves and, uh, have a new life as these
things. We call them anthrobots for obvious reasons. Uh, and they have all kinds of novel,
uh, shapes and behaviors. Um, I, I, I call this, uh, uh, uh, uh, kind of a technology for personalized
agential interventions because if you ask what can these things do? Well, one thing they can do is
this. If you, if you take human neurons and plate them on a dish and then put a big scratch through
them, uh, these anthrobots can settle down. We call this a super bot because there's probably
10 of them here. Um, they'll settle down and within a few days you lift them up and you see that what
they did was they took the two sides of the, of the, of the wound and they knitted the nerves
together. Okay. So they have the ability to, to repair these, these kinds of neural wounds. I mean,
who would have thought that your tracheal cells, which normally sit quietly in your airway,
uh, for, you know, decades that, that given the opportunity taken out of the body,
they would actually reassemble themselves, um, into, into a new kind of creature with these new
capacities. And so this is, I think, hugely important for the future of medicine because,
uh, just imagine, uh, once you, once we understand what kind of healing effects these guys can have,
they can be injected into your body. They do not require immune suppression because they're made of
your own cells. So, uh, personalized medicine in that way. Um, they share with your body all the
priors about what health is, what diseases, inflammation, cancer. You don't have to, uh,
uh, build all those detectors from scratch like you would with some sort of, uh, engineered nanobot,
because these are your own cells. They already, uh, understand all those things. And so, uh, again,
you see, you start to see this plasticity, you know, again, what, what, what you just saw is not
some, some embryonic developmental stage that they're recovering, uh, back to, back in their history.
There, there is no such stage. This is, this is completely novel, uh, set of behaviors. And so,
now, uh, I'm going to finish up here with, um, kind of some, some big picture, uh, big picture
thinking here. What I've been telling you about all of these stories and all of their kind of
biomedical implications for cancer and birth defects and regenerative medicine, uh, there's a bigger picture
here, which is that what we're talking about is a, an example of how to recognize and how to
communicate with an unconventional intelligence. It is not just philosophy that thinking about
groups of cells as decision-making, uh, memory having, uh, goal-directed beings has led us to
lots of discoveries that were not made by the standard paradigm, which sees them as simple machines.
So my point is that, uh, along this spectrum, I call this the spectrum of persuadability because
it's all about what kind of tools you're going to use to communicate, uh, and, and control these various
systems, right? So here it's, you know, hardware rewiring and maybe some control theory and
cybernetics with things like thermostats. And then here maybe, um, uh, behavioral science and
training and things like that. And then here, you know, you have some sort of rich relationship with,
uh, with cogent reasoning and so on. Um, the idea is that we can't just have philosophical feelings
about where things fit on this continuum. Most people assume that cells are somewhere down,
you know, down here, that they're basically simple, uh, simple machines that need to be treated
that way. And, uh, that leaves a lot on the table because we're doing all kinds of interesting
things with cell, um, training and, and, uh, really taking advantage of the problem-solving
competencies of these things. And so we have to do experiments. And so that brings us back to
the issue of, uh, of AI, because it isn't, uh, the, the question of AI isn't about today's language
models. You know, today it's pretty easy to say, well, GPT-4 isn't really like, uh, like a human mind
and, and so on. No, no, it isn't. And it doesn't matter for two reasons. First, because there are
many interesting minds that are not human minds and some of them are, are quite, quite alien.
And second, because, uh, the whole point is that you, you, you can't just assume these things. You
have to do experiments. You have to ask yourself, uh, do I know where intelligence comes from? Why do
simple things? And, and we've studied some very simple things that have amazing, uh, unexpected,
emergent, intelligent behaviors. Um, do, do we know where that comes from and how to recognize
them? And I'll tell you that at this moment we don't. So this is the science of diverse intelligence
and we need to be extremely careful. And I think this is where the ethics come in, comes in. We need
to be extremely careful about not denying, uh, uh, uh, moral, uh, moral worth and, and, and various, um,
kinds of ethical protections to beings because they don't look like us. You know, humans have a very long
history of, uh, trying to make, uh, separations between in-group and out-group based on really
pretty ridiculous, um, uh, uh, kind of, uh, very, uh, surface-y sorts of, um, uh, characteristics.
And we are, uh, in your lifetime, you are going to be confronted with, uh, all sorts of novel
beings. So, so all of Darwin's endless forms, most beautiful here on earth are like a tiny corner
of this whole space. You know, hybrids and cyborgs and all kinds of non-neurotypical humans with
implants and, and, um, different kinds of, uh, connections to other, other creatures and to other
technical systems. Uh, you know, pretty much any combination of evolved material, uh, engineered
material and software is some kind of being. Okay. They're going to be chimeras and cyborgs. And so,
it's not about, uh, the language models of today. It's about beings that are nowhere with you on the
tree of life. You cannot decide how you're going to relate to them in the old ways, which was to,
you know, you sort of knock on it. And if you hear a metallic clanging sound, you say, aha,
so, so you were made in a factory and you're, and you're boring and I can take you apart and that's
what, and, and, and that's okay. Whereas if you heard like this, uh, you know, this, this soft,
uh, woolly thud, you would say, ah, well, you're a real, uh, being like me and I have to,
I have to treat you well, even though we're not even very good at that as humans. But, but the point is
that, uh, those kinds of categories are going to be worthless because the space of possible bodies
and minds is extending radically. And, uh, we're going to have to develop much better ethical
frameworks for kind of, um, you know, I'm sure you've heard of symbiosis. I think what we're really
talking about is a kind of synthbiosis where we have to learn how to relate to beings that are
different than us. And, uh, that, uh, you know, so we're going to have to figure out how you, uh,
how you detect where things are on this continuum so that we find appropriate balance points between
objectophilia. Objectophilia is the thing where people fall in love with bridges and, you know,
they think the Eiffel tower is, is, you know, uh, married to them and so on. Uh, right. So,
so things down here, you're not going to have that deep relationship with things up here,
but other people are really trapped in the other end of the continuum where they see things that are
not like today's standard humans. And they say, uh, you know, those are not, those are not real minds
worthy of, of, of, of care and respect and so on. And that very quickly devolves to a kind of idea
that's basically love only your own kind. And, and I think that's, that's, that's probably lots,
much worse than this. So, um, we really need to, and if anybody has questions, we can talk about it.
We really need to ask, you know, given all of these facts, uh, what, what are, what, what is a human
actually? Um, and I have a kind of a weird, um, answer to that. Uh, and, and if you were going on,
on a long journey and you wanted a companion, what, what is it that you actually care about?
You know, when you say you will, you know, you don't want a Roomba, uh, that's, that's not enough,
but what do you actually care about? It's not the DNA. It's, I don't, I don't think anybody has any
allegiance to our particular human DNA or the specific set of organs, but what is it that you
do want, you know, in a, in a rich human level relationship? That's, that's very worth thinking
about. So, okay. So I'm going to, I'm going to stop here. If anybody's interested in this stuff,
here's a bunch of papers that go into, um, all of this in, uh, in great detail. Uh, most importantly,
I need to thank, um, all the people who, uh, did the work that I showed you today. So, um,
here are all the, uh, all the postdocs and students and, uh, and everybody else who, uh, who contributed.
We have lots of amazing, um, collaborators. Um, our funding comes from all kinds of people. I have to
do a disclosure here because there are three companies that have spun out of our lab that, uh,
are supporting some of our work. So, so there's some business connections here. Um, but most of all,
uh, I always thank the model system because, because the various, uh, animals, uh, and,
and, and plants do all of the heavy lifting in, uh, teaching us about biology and about ourselves.
So, thank you so much.
