You might think there's a direct connection between intelligence and success, right?
It's the material success, career success, so on.
It turns out that there is up to a point.
After that point, there's no connection.
It's very, very difficult to find a connection.
So I'm going to talk to you today about why super intelligent people,
super intelligent people, are not the most successful people you know
and the ones that make it in the corporate world,
they tend to be about 10% higher than the median.
So let's talk about it.
If we take IQ as a proxy for intelligence,
and there are all kinds of issues with using IQ and so on,
but it's well studied and actually has a very definite predictability
in terms of socioeconomic class and outcome to a point,
only up until about 10 to 15 points above the median.
So just to remind you on IQ, it is based around 100 being the IQ median,
where a 10-year-old takes a test, they perform like a 10-year-old,
they get a 100%, right?
And if they perform like an 11-year-old, they get 110.
So that's just a little bit higher than the median.
But the median is forced around a normal curve around 100.
For women, it's about 4.5 points lower than men.
Look it up.
It's a fact.
But let's just assume 100 as the median.
Now, that is quite predictable.
10 points below, 10 points above in terms of socioeconomic outcome.
So whether you do well in corporations, you make an outsized living versus not doing so well.
And after about 115 points there, more or less, the tracking starts getting iffy.
And once you get up to above genius level, which is considered 140, just, you know,
you figure a 10-year-old taking a test like a 14-year-old, that's a big step.
Then the predictions are way off.
And as anecdotal evidence, right, I look to Einstein, who couldn't get any look into his life.
He didn't speak.
He didn't talk for years.
His parents were super worried about him, and he did okay in education,
and then couldn't get a job for like nine years in physics.
Albert Einstein couldn't get a job in physics.
And he turns out to be one of the brightest minds in history.
There's another guy, William James Sidis.
You should look this guy up.
He's considered the smartest man that we know of, that has lived in history.
And I don't know what his IQ was, but it was outrageous.
He got into Harvard, I think, when he was 11 or 12, graduated when he was 16.
And he was a loser.
He was a loser.
He was a clerk.
He was a child prodigy.
He could read, you know, super early.
I mean, this guy was out there.
He was smart.
And he was a loser.
He ended up being a clerk at different companies and just grinding away.
And the newspapers, when he was a kid, they would all go around and be like,
wow, look at this guy.
He is brilliant.
He must do amazing things.
And let's track him.
And they tracked him through his lifetime.
And by, you know, the time he was in his, like, mid-20s, 30s, he was doing nothing with his life.
And so much so that the press ridiculed the guy.
And I think he ended up committing suicide.
And they would find him out.
He would switch jobs.
And then they would go and find him and start making fun of him, right?
This is, like, the original social media harassment.
And I think he committed suicide.
And then Einstein, like, why is it?
Why is it that this guy did not really thrive in education or in companies?
And I'm going to tell you why.
This all started getting interesting for me when I joined Google.
I worked at Google for, like, nine years.
When I joined, when I joined Google, I met some of the smartest people I'd ever known.
Just boom.
There are some people that, you know, you have a conversation and you can work up to a level of intelligence, you know, within your discourse.
It's almost a shorthand.
With some of the people that I met early on at Google, boom.
We just start here.
We just, it's just don't, don't, don't, don't.
And smart people know smart people.
I'm not saying anything about myself, but the, I guess maybe I am, but the discourse went immediately to just very high-level discussion.
And it was very easy.
It was like talking in shorthand.
What I noticed was, and I had just come from the Boston Consulting Group, good amount of smart people there, but a little different.
And, you know, went to Wharton, smart people there.
Brown, smart people there.
Got into MIT, smart people there.
But like, but when I went into Google, I met people that really build shit, like really like, like think smart, like smart, smart.
And about seven years into my career at Google, about 2016 or 17, I guess it was nine years, I realized all of the really smart people had left.
Everybody that I had admired, like as being really smart, like, as being really smart, were all gone.
And what was left were this, this middle group.
And call it, you know, 100 to 115 intelligence.
And they were, they were all fighting over resources.
They were all doing the corporate shenanigans, all of the, all of the, the stupid infighting and politics.
And it really made me wonder, like, what, why would all of these brilliant people leave a perfectly good corporation?
And then, and then I left shortly afterwards.
And it got me really thinking about intelligence.
And now when I, when I, you know, I talk to people at Google, and I know quite a few of them, or in corporate world, they all muddle around the meme.
And typically, typically, these guys are the, like the 105 to 115, take that as a proxy.
And they thrive there.
And so, so that's my first point.
So, the super intelligent don't necessarily thrive in corporations.
Why is that?
In corporations, you have to have a dullness of spirit.
You, you really have to shut your mind off to certain things.
You can't say, you can't say, you know, as a, as a product manager or as an engineer to say, hey, you know what?
When, when the, when the executives say, hey, we need to get growth.
You can't turn around and be like, you know what?
I've analyzed all of the different projects.
They're probably not worth our time to do.
We're better off looking at something else.
No.
You, you cannot do, even if that's the right answer.
Even if that's the right answer.
That is punished.
That is absolutely punished in corporate world.
What you have to say is, yeah, oh, wow, I got, I got some great projects.
Yeah, let's do this.
Let's do that.
And then, and then blame people for, for not executing properly.
Right?
Cover your ass.
That's how you get ahead in, in, in corporations.
And you make friends.
You get, you get buddies that are, that are in, in management.
And you shoot the shit with them and you get to know them well because nobody gets promoted
because they're, they're more productive than somebody else.
You all get promoted.
Everybody gets promoted because some manager or group of managers say that person gets promoted.
That's it.
That's it.
So it's, it's, it really is about your politics and who you know and how you know them and,
and getting them to scratch your back.
So for the moderate intelligent people, this is doable.
You can, you can turn off that whole, the whole rest of your brain to say like, okay,
I'm not going for the right answer.
I'm going for my answer.
But for the uber intelligent, that's very difficult.
That's very difficult because you can see it.
So that's one, that's one issue.
The other issue is that, you know, I've seen a bunch of research on, um, on smart people
and certainly the research is done from people who are not in that group.
They, they, they, wow, they're trying to understand, you know, the, the, the super smart and their motivations
and, uh, they themselves are not.
It's like putting a stethoscope to a supercomputer.
Okay, you get, you get some idea of what's going on, but, but really they draw conclusions that are absolutely false.
You might've seen some of these as well.
And one of the researchers goes something like this, um, that, that super, super intelligent people are not super successful because when they're children, everything is, is, you know, laid out for them.
Um, and, and, and everything is easy in education and understanding some, some things.
So they, they, they learn not to work for things.
Okay.
That's how the story goes.
And then they get into corporate America or they get into, you know, life and they, they haven't trained this muscle for working hard.
Bullshit.
That is absolute bullshit.
Now, maybe there are examples of that where somebody is like, yeah, you know, it was all easy before and now it's a little bit difficult and I can't, no, no, no, no, no.
The reason why super intelligent people, one of the main reasons, uh, are, are not like at the forefront of industry and, and, and pushing forward things is because the highly intelligent can see the end way before you can.
Or maybe you're in, in, in, in the group, but they can way before these researchers can, they can stop and sit and within a couple of seconds, minutes, figure out what their life path would be.
If they, if they, if they worked hard on this particular path and it's not that appealing.
If you really, if you really think about, you know, uh, about what a life path would be on, on working a, a corporate job, 60 hours a week to get ahead.
And then, and then, and then go do this and the luck involved.
And then you go, is it worth the squeeze?
Is the juice worth the squeeze?
A lot of people on their deathbed say, meh, not really, not really.
And so the, the, the Uber intelligent can look at this beforehand, a priori and say like, no, I'm not, why would I do that?
Why would I do that?
And everybody else in this middling thing, right?
Say, say 85 IQ up to 110.
It's like, well, of course you should do that.
You have, you have the intelligence.
You could do it all.
So yeah, but it doesn't matter.
So what if you make, and they, they, they know we, even without the research on happiness, uh, linked to income, which, which flattens out and asymptotes, uh, as, as soon as you get enough for living, enough for food and a roof over your head and a couple of fun things to do, your, your, your happiness connection to money, just asymptotes on a logarithmic scale.
It's, you know, 10 X, a hundred X, a thousand X.
It doesn't matter.
Your, your happiness is kind of capped.
And we, even without seeing this research, a highly intelligent person can see this.
So what's the, what's the strategy of life?
It's to be down here.
It's to work very little.
It's to, it's to one strategy, one strategy, right?
Because you're still looking out of your same eyes.
You're still eating food.
It still turns to poop.
You're still like, you know, living in a house.
I remember buying my first house.
I was like, you know, my wife was super excited.
I'm like, this is the same as an apartment.
It really is.
Except now I got to do maintenance.
And that's life.
And, and, and as a, as a super intelligent person, they look, I don't know what to call them, mental or something, but, you know, you can look out into the future and, and just see like, no, that this human experience would be very similar.
If I, if I make a million dollars a year, 10 million, a hundred million, 500 million, it doesn't matter.
It doesn't matter.
You, you can rent a boat or you can buy a yacht.
It doesn't matter.
You're still looking out of your same eyes, still living in your same skin.
And this path, you're working 80 hours a week for someone else, for someone else, right?
So your wife and your kids can enjoy the nice house.
They didn't do anything for it.
They're just like, oh, yes, it's such a nice house.
Okay.
Okay.
So that's, that's one of the first things.
So what do they end up doing?
They end up doing their own thing.
And this is where I see some, the, a bifurcation, right, of, of highly intelligent people.
Some of them discover something that is intellectually challenging enough where they dig into it.
Einstein could be in this, in this category.
Eric Weinstein, smart guy, could be in this.
Maybe Jordan Peterson.
Don't know.
Also, you know, smart guy.
And they find something that they're actually interested in and they can dig into intellectually.
It's got a, it's got enough surface area where they can really take it.
And they make that their life's work because that is fulfilling.
You live up here.
You live right in your mind on what you're experiencing.
And using that brain to figure out, you know, complicated things is fun.
It's exciting.
It might not be, you know, economically rewarding as it is to muddle through a career and, and
work up to, you know, to be a COO or CEO or something like that.
But it's, it's much more interesting.
And you don't have to, you know, necessarily put yourself in a totalitarian regime to do that, right?
In a corporation.
So, so that's, that's a big one.
That's a big one.
And you'll see this with, with highly intelligent people that they, that they, they latch onto things and they think about them deeply.
And for most other people, they don't get it.
You can't even explain what they're thinking.
You can't even explain what you, what the language is, is so inefficient compared to what's going up in the brain that bringing it over, what, you know, having, say, five different ideas in your head.
And then being able to bring that over to somebody who, who has a moderate sense of intelligence, very difficult, very difficult.
And it just gets frustrating.
And you're just like, I'd love to talk to you, but you just don't, you don't get it.
The assumptions are different.
The, the, you know, you, you, you, you know, people have to take shorthands.
They have to, they have to accept things as true that, that are not necessarily true because otherwise they can't, they can't, you know, they can't have that, that cognitive dissonance in their head.
And so like, for instance, you know, having, having projects that, you know, are stupid.
You, you, I, I know people that are not dumb, but you know, they're not in that, that 140 area and they just, they just turn it off.
And they're like, oh yeah, and they're pretty successful, right?
Monetarily.
And, and corporation and so on.
Education's a similar point.
Education is, our education system globally is the dumbest fucking thing.
Now, look, for getting, you know, getting people, you know, some moniker of, of an educated mind.
Okay, but it was designed in the 1830s, right?
By German industrialists to, to, to basically get people to sit at their station and be able to do their work.
That's how it was designed.
That's why we have bells in our, in our public schools to tell us when the next station.
And you, you basically are learning to sit still, shut up and do whatever the master says.
That is stupid.
That is not education.
And, and highly intelligent people know this immediately.
When you were a kid, it is like, what the hell am I doing here?
Why is this idiot talking to me?
And look, you know, God bless the school teachers, but they ain't the smartest people in the world.
So they get a super intelligent kid in there and they have no idea what to do.
They're like, the kid's running circles around them and they're just like, the, the kid, it's like, what, why do I have to go through this torture of, of learning these things?
You, you know, they are not going to be that useful, right?
We need to revamp the, the, the education system.
And then when you get into college, it's not about, Hey, let, let, let intellectualism thrive.
I think it might've used to be there in some colleges.
And then they get political.
Like what happened in, in pre-Nazi Germany, the, the, the universities there were all top universities.
And, you know, coming up with quantum mechanics and physics and so on until they got political.
And then they were, you, you couldn't speak what you wanted to speak.
And, and an intellectual environment needs that outside of whatever, whatever's wrong, whatever's right or wrong.
You have to throw that out in intellectual discussions and intellectual curiosity, because maybe the big bang is not correct.
Oh my God, you know, five years ago, 10 years ago, there's no way you could even whisper that in a physics department.
But now with James Webb telescopes, you were looking at it and we're like, huh, we got to modify this theory.
That's science.
That is how we make progress.
And, and so when you're, when you're highly intelligent, you get funneled into this education system that's designed for the muddling masses.
And it's awful.
Even the, even the, the, the, the gifted course, even the gifted stuff, you just do more work.
You just do more work.
You're like, like, Hey, we're going to do some, some great stuff.
We're going to learn more histories that what, why do I want to do this?
Are you kidding me?
Yeah.
And it's, you know, taught by bozos, nothing against teachers, but most of them are not, are not super highly intelligent.
So I'm not looking for solutions here.
I, I, it's, you know, there, I have other ideas about solutions.
Um, and there's, there's some good research about, uh, solutions, but, you know, you can't always believe, uh, sociological
and psychological research.
My whole point is this.
The smartest people that I know are not the most successful.
The smartest people that I know, I mean, fucking out there, smart, smart, like bump, bump, bump up here, smart, where you are going to have a conversation with them like that about all kinds of topics.
And they've thought about it deeply.
And if they haven't, they're thinking about it right then.
Those people are not the most successful people I know.
They really are not.
The most successful people that I know are right around the middle, right?
I say, say 105 to 115 intelligence as a proxy IQ.
And you need that.
You need that.
That is what corporations are designed for.
They are designed for cooperation across a wide segment of society.
And that widest segment, that largest segment of society has an IQ right around a hundred.
So everything in a corporation is designed for a person with a hundred IQ.
And if you fall out of that, either on the high side or the low side, it's very difficult to make it in a corporation, which is the bulk of where we get our financial means.
So highly intelligent people just check out.
They just check out.
Why would I spend, you know, my blood, sweat, and tears trying to figure out this whole corporate thing when, you know, the people I'm talking to are just, they're not all that.
Does this resonate with you?
Are you, are you in the highly intelligent people?
You probably, because of the Dunning-Kruger effect, you probably don't think you are.
And if you do think you are, you probably not.
Dunning-Kruger effect is, you know, when people know just a little bit, they think they know an awful lot.
You know anybody like that?
And when people know an awful lot, they realize how much more there is to know.
And they, they think they actually don't know much.
That's Dunning-Kruger and one of my favorite principles in psychology.
So if you think you're really smart, if you think you know it all, you probably don't.
And if you think that you're like a cat trying to figure out calculus, trying to figure out the world, and it's just, holy shit, there's a lot there.
You might be a little bit smarter than you think.
So I hope you're having a great day.
I would love to hear your comments about intelligence and how that affects your life.
One side or another, if you disagree with me, disagree with me.
No problem.
I love all the comments.
And, you know, it's, but just, you know, bring experience, bring data, bring a good discussion to the table.
And on that, I hope you're having a wonderful day.
Wherever you fall on the intelligence scale, it's just one part of our lives.
And you can have a wonderful life any place that you're there.
You just live the life that you want to live.
Don't let anybody judge you.
Don't let anybody tell you.
Otherwise, you got one life here that we know of.
Live it.
It's amazing.
It's amazing.
And you can do anything with that life.
You can even subscribe to this channel.
Or like the video.
I'm glad you're here.
I really enjoy the comments and the discussions that we have.
So have a great day.
Live long and prosper.
Take care.
Bye.
Bye.
