This video is brought to you by Imprint. Hi, welcome to another episode of ColdFusion.
Has anyone seen Mark Zuckerberg lately? He looks a bit different. The CEO used to be known as the
quintessential nerd, but now the plain tees and dark hoodies have been replaced with contemporary
style, and his timid frame has now been replaced with that of a fully-fledged MMA fighter. This
makeover might just seem like a change in personal appearance, but when you look deeper, it's
significant. Like it or not, Mark Zuckerberg is one of the most influential people on the planet.
Billions of people around the world use his products. Moreover, no one can challenge the
power he holds within Meta, literally. Meta's corporate board is set up so that Mark can't
be removed against his will. So a rebranding of the Zuck is more consequential than meets the eye.
It could be a clever strategy to redefine how the public perceives Zuckerberg, and by extension,
the companies he leads. Is it working? Early signs say yes. We'll get to that later,
but much of the internet is already approving the change, with GQ magazine stating that the
rebrand is so good that it, quote, needs to be studied. And it's not just the outside. Mark also
appears to have modified his political views. In this episode, we'll take a look at the new era of Zuck,
his journey, how he reinvented himself, and how all of this affects the companies that he runs.
Those who know a lot of details about Meta's controversies aren't likely to fall for it,
but it just might shift opinions for a lot of people out there.
The behaviour of humans as a group is pretty simple. If the majority respect a public figure,
that positive perception leaks into everything that public figure does.
A great example is the power of a CEO's public image. A positive example of this working was with
Steve Jobs. If you think about it, he was basically a modern take on Gandhi, from his meditative poses
when answering questions, his philosophical answers, even down to the round glasses. It can be traced back
to his love and inspiration from the 60s, when Eastern ideas came into the tech world during the hippie
movement and computer counterculture in California. For Steve Jobs, the Gandhi aura worked in his favour
for decades, hiding his temperamental and explosive nature behind the scenes. Even till the 2000s,
the public ethos for Apple remained the same, an alternative tech company made for the benefit of
humans, while according to them, everything else on the market was unnecessarily complicated and anti-human.
Zuckerberg is almost the complete opposite. For much of his career, Zuckerberg's public image
has been characterised as anti-human and detached. Zuckerberg was, in many ways, emblematic of Silicon
Valley's culture of innovation without a deep concern for social impact. In the movie The Social
Network, which is based on the story of Mark Zuckerberg and how Facebook was first founded,
Mark was portrayed as an awkward, unlikeable jerk in a hoodie.
Even though the movie was released in 2010, that perception would linger for years to come.
Zuck's business acumen would be demonstrated over the following decade. At the end of that period,
Facebook had 2 billion users and his acquisitions of Instagram and WhatsApp proved to be as successful.
He had so much power within these companies that he essentially was Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp.
There's no doubt that his personal brand began to suffer alongside Facebook's growing controversies.
Zuckerberg effectively became a transnational tech czar at the centre of privacy scandals,
as well as political and cultural debates. The results of which made Zuckerberg one of the
most hated household names.
In 2018, the Cambridge Analytica scandal further destroyed Mark's public image.
We've got to remember that Facebook was accused of allowing a political analytics firm to improperly
access the personal data of millions of users. Zuckerberg would testify before Congress,
and it was bizarre in many ways. His behaviour was so unhuman that he would be called a robot or a
lizard in a human costume. That sounds pretty bad already, but what was going on internationally was
even worse. In some countries, Zuckerberg's companies caused mini-apocalypses. In 2017, Facebook contributed to a
genocide against the Rohingya people in Myanmar. In Colombia, Facebook has been a breeding ground for
social unrest and political fighting. And then there's Sri Lanka. During its economic meltdown,
Facebook was in the crosshairs for spreading false rumours and conspiracy theories, which only made things
worse.
Meanwhile, content moderators both in the US and developing countries faced poor working conditions
while screening horrific content, often without support from Facebook. Then, in October 2021,
whistleblower Frances Hagen reveals some shocking information. The company had internal knowledge
of Instagram's harmful effects on teenage mental health and its role in stoking political violence
around the world. And the same was true for Facebook.
I saw Facebook repeatedly encounter conflicts between its own profits and our safety.
Facebook consistently resolved these conflicts in favour of its own profits.
The result has been more division, more harm, more lies, more threats, and more combat.
In some cases, this dangerous online talk has led to actual violence that harms and even kills people.
The leaks painted a troubling picture. A company aware of its impact but seemingly unwilling to make any
substantial changes. And this ignited public distrust on a global scale.
For Zuckerberg, now the problem went beyond negative headlines. It was about facing a new
kind of backlash that threatened the future of the entire company.
With so much at stake, Zuckerberg had to rethink not only his personal brand,
but how Facebook was perceived on a global scale.
Zuckerberg's first major rebrand was not a personal one, but a corporate one.
In October 2021, the same month as the whistleblower leaks,
Facebook officially rebranded as Meta. It was a move designed to signal the company's pivot
towards the future of virtual reality and the metaverse.
I am proud to announce that starting today, our company is now Meta.
However, the timing of this rebrand was suspicious. Facebook just wanted everyone to forget about
their past. But it didn't really make sense, especially when Facebook was still Meta's largest
platform and their primary revenue source. The metaverse, Meta's namesake, was supposed to be a
connected digital universe where people could work, play, and socialize through virtual reality.
The results were less than stellar. Clunky movement and menu mechanics,
terrible graphics, and a barren wasteland was the best that we got.
Still, in 2024, the Metaverse is losing the company billions.
This digital selfie of Zuck in the Metaverse also didn't do his public perception any good.
As the $10 billion Metaverse was flopping, the stock market reacted. We all remember that massive
stock dip of Meta in 2022. In the same year, he ranked fourth on the world's most hated
billionaires list. This was his rock bottom. At this point, he was probably worse off than all
those years ago when the Social Network movie was released. So really, even though Meta represented a
daring new direction, the company couldn't escape the shadows of its past controversies.
Business-wise though, Zuckerberg did miraculously manage to stabilize the ship. Eventually,
as the rest of the tech world pivoted towards AI, so did Zuck with his open source Lama LLM,
and he would also focus more on VR and AI headset hardware.
As Zuckerberg forged ahead, he faced an uphill battle of convincing both investors,
users, and the media that Meta was simply not Facebook with a new coat of paint,
but actually a company genuinely committed to change. And to do this, he had to change himself.
Summer in 2023 is where Zuckerberg's personal rebranding became evident.
The CEO, once known for being dweebish and awkward, threw himself into MMA training and
athleticism, sharing social media posts highlighting his martial arts training and gym routines.
This transformation was to show that Zuckerberg was tougher, more disciplined,
and a determined leader, someone capable of navigating Meta through turbulent times.
The shift also helped humanize him in ways where his previous image failed to do so.
There were regular memes of Zuckerberg being a droid or a robot, but now he's just a dude that does MMA.
Mark, are the allegations true that you are secretly a lizard?
I'm going to have to go with no on that. I am not a lizard.
In fact, Zuckerberg competed in his first jiu-jitsu tournament, and he won gold and silver medals.
And this achievement actually received positive reactions from the public.
This surprising turn has sparked curiosity from both the tech world and the public at large.
In many ways, Zuckerberg's transformation into a more normal and accessible figure has softened
some of the criticism directed at him. And we can't forget the Elon Musk vs.
Zuck cage fight. It never materialized, but it was a surreal moment in history.
But the next stage of the transformation came in 2024. The Meta CEO began to look different.
In April of 2024, he posted an Instagram reel about updates to the Meta AI assistant
and Llama 3 AI model. But people weren't focusing on that. They were focused on something else.
His gold chain. Streetwear had entered the picture. After 13 years of jeans and grey shirts,
Zuckerberg transformed himself into an unlikely fashion talking point.
Recently, he wore a shirt that essentially read, either Zuck or nothing. A play on an ancient
Roman saying, either Caesar or nothing. Another recent shirt sported by Zuck,
features Greek words that mean, learning through suffering. These choices in apparel are purposeful
and self-referential. A move that some people like. Other than his appearance changes though,
Zuckerberg, particularly over the last year, has appeared in popular podcasts and shows.
Whether that's showing up on Lex Friedman multiple times, or more recently,
YouTube shows like Cleo Abrams or The Verge. These appearances were generally received favourably by
audiences. Alright, so at this point you might be thinking, okay, yeah, but who really cares?
Normally, this wouldn't mean that much. But the thing is, Zuckerberg's style directly impacts how
people view him and Meta. Billions of dollars are on the line here. As the CEO of a tech giant,
under scrutiny for something as serious as child endangerment, his image is crucial.
In our celebrity CEO culture, could Zuckerberg's transformation from an awkward nerd to an MMA
fighter divert attention from Meta's ongoing issues?
By presenting himself as more approachable and dynamic, Zuckerberg is signalling to everyone
that Meta is evolving too. Amber Venn's Box, founder of the shopping platform LTK, explains to TechCrunch,
quote, we have spoken and written communication, we have body language, and we have drip. Our appearance
does communicate a lot about us and influences the way that people feel about us. Personal style is a
communication tool. Just compare this picture of Zuckerberg to this droid pretending to sip water.
It's not at all logical, but the change-up really does affect how people think about him.
And it's not just MMA or sporting certain clothes, because as recently as August 2024,
Zuckerberg wrote a letter to Congress which seemed to express regret about failing to speak out against
the administration when it pressured Facebook to censor certain COVID-19 posts during the pandemic,
a move that free speech activists couldn't believe. However, this image overhaul has raised some
questions about its sincerity. Is Mark Zuckerberg's new persona an authentic reflection of personal
growth, or is it simply a well-orchestrated PR campaign designed to rehabilitate his Tanya's
reputation? Either way, is there any evidence that it's working? The answer is, actually, yes.
When talking about AI and stealing data to train models, Zuck argued that this should be considered
fair use and that, quote, individual creators or publishers tend to overestimate their value of
specific content, end quote. He took a hard-line stance, saying if content makers demand payment,
he'd just remove them. Already not good. But then, when it came to the negative relationship between
mental health and social media on teens, Zuck straight-up disputed the claims and growing
controversy. A terrible look. But the thing is, have you heard any of this recent news? Some of you might,
but it certainly didn't receive the same amount of public scrutiny that it would have if Zuck was
still a lizard robot. Everyone has basically been focusing on Meta's latest products, unveiled by a
new, transformed Mark Zuckerberg. The new cycle quickly moved on. Of course, there are a lot of
other variables at play, but it's still very interesting to observe. Meta's recent Orion Smart
Glasses unveiling was perceived very positively by the public, but there's room for pause. Smart
glasses, by their very nature, collect fast amounts of data, including the user's location,
behavior, and even biometric information. This data can be used to create hyper-personalized
experiences, but it also raises concerns about how much of a user's life will be monitored and tracked.
Again, we have to remember, Meta isn't known for respecting user privacy. And another point to
consider, two Harvard students demonstrated just how easy it was to track unsuspecting people by
hacking Meta's Ray-Ban glasses. Welcome back. We've all heard about those smart glasses,
but did you know there's a way to use the glasses to learn personal information about strangers
just by looking at them? Yeah, this is some frightening stuff here, right? So there's two
Harvard students that are now highlighting the privacy vulnerabilities that are associated with
these glasses. We built glasses that let you identify anybody on the street. The information
a tool collects from just a photo of your face is staggering. To use it, you just put the glasses
on, then as you walk by people, the glasses will detect when somebody's face is in frame. This
photo is used to analyze them, and after a few seconds, their personal information pops up on your phone.
Oh, hi, ma'am. Wait, are you a Betsy ? Yes. Oh, okay. I think I met you through like the
Cambridge Community Foundation, right? Yeah, yeah. It's great to meet you. I'm Cain.
Reactions Harvard juniors Anne Foon Nguyen and Cain Ardaphio got when they showed people how quickly
they could learn personal information about them, like their address and family members' names,
ranged from amazement to shock. Is your address for
Bull Valley? Yeah. Oh, Atlanta, Georgia, 303. Yeah. What about John and Susan? Are they your, uh...
Those are my parents. Parents? Okay, cool. Oh my god. Yes. They were like, oh my god,
I've like never seen that photo of me before. So it was pretty clear to us that like a lot of the
data that we were able to uncover using these like relatively simple tools is like people didn't even
know that existed. They use smart glasses that anyone can buy. Sure, all of this data used to recognize
the people in the video is based on information that's already publicly available on Meta's apps.
But having someone know your personal information by just watching you walk down the street is a
point in society when it comes to user privacy that we've never, ever been at. The data harvesting
though goes beyond possible targeted ads and identification. Meta has stated that images and
videos captured by smart glasses could be used to train its AI models, which is a whole nother can of worms.
So in summary, even though Zuck and Meta's rebrand has softened his image, the bigger issues are still
at large. While Zuckerberg's revamped and tougher image may be grabbing headlines, it doesn't change
the fact that Meta still faces some big fundamental issues. Meta's business model relies on keeping users
engaged and enraged. The longer people stay on the platforms, the more money Meta makes. Unfortunately,
controversial or sensational content just tends to do that best, dividing every society it comes across.
Meta's reliance on targeted ads is also a concern for privacy. Its impact on political discourse and
mental health are messing with the lives of billions. He may have changed his appearance,
but can we really trust the guy? I'd say the vast majority of people still say no. But it begs the
question, what could someone like Zuckerberg do to regain trust after doing so much harm to so many,
knowingly or unknowingly? But credit where credit is due, running one of the most influential companies
of our generation from such a young age is by no means an easy feat. For Meta and Zuckerberg to truly
regain public trust, it must go beyond rebranding efforts. They've got to make substantial changes to
how the company operates, interacts with its users, and most importantly, respects its users. So what's
your take on Zak, his transformation and the overall story surrounding his companies? Let us know in the
comments section below. If you're watching this channel, then you probably love learning new things,
but it can often be difficult to find the time. That's where today's sponsor, Imprint, comes in.
They offer bite-sized learning in a style that's both beautiful and builds a learning habit. It features book
summaries, courses, and articles on science, technology, business, history, economics, leadership,
and more. Imprint breaks down learning into engaging graphics, animations, and lessons that can replace
useless social media scrolling. With Imprint, each lesson only takes a few minutes a day. I enjoyed the
lesson on thinking like a scientist from the book Think Again by Adam Grant. It teaches us that usually
when we're making decisions or communicating with people, we tend to have overconfidence in our
assumptions. Thinking like a scientist means that we take in new information or adjust our views.
In an experiment, it was proven that business leaders that adopted that mindset vastly outperformed
the control group. Fascinating stuff. So, to try everything that Imprint has to offer for free,
for a full seven days, visit imprintapp.com slash coldfusion or click the link in the description.
The first 200 of you will get 20% off an Imprint annual premium subscription.
Also, if you're a Patreon of ColdFusion, be sure to check your notifications. I've just made a big
announcement over there. So, thanks for watching. My name is Dagogo, and you've been watching ColdFusion,
and I'll catch you again soon for the next episode, which will hopefully be on the topic,
Why is Generation Z so poor? It's going to be an interesting one,
so keep a look out for it. Okay, cheers guys. Have a good one.
ColdFusion. It's new thinking.
