I'm determined to deliver growth, create wealth and put more money in people's pockets.
This can only be achieved by working people in partnership with leading businesses
like BlackRock to capitalise on the UK's position as a world leading hub for investment.
The thing that stuck with me when I think about what he said there
is this idea that BlackRock is actually a business that does things, which is not what it does.
Do you think Keir Starman knows what he's talking about?
No, I don't think he has any idea at all.
You don't have to go far on YouTube to find critiques of capitalism.
Capitalism is crisis. Capitalism is doomed to fail.
Maybe. But here on Nevaro Media, we also like to offer a little bit more detail about the people,
ideas, organisations that you probably hear about on a daily or weekly basis.
One of them is BlackRock.
Like I say, you've probably heard of them before, but what do they do?
Why do they matter? How come they're so politically influential?
Britain's Prime Minister Keir Starman recently appeared in a photo with the CEO of BlackRock,
that was posted on Twitter.
And Keir Starman said that Britain's future prosperity depends on the likes of BlackRock.
But what precisely is their business after all?
They're in the financial services industry, but they're not a bank.
And why is the Prime Minister so obsequious to them?
Why is he bending the knee to a company you've probably heard of, but don't really fully understand?
To discuss all of that and more is today's guest. It's a record-breaking third time to welcome on
Downstream, Brett Christophers. Thanks for joining us once again.
Brett Christophers Thanks for having me. It's good to be back.
It's great to have you. I think you're the first guest we've had on three times.
Brett Christophers Wow, I'm honoured.
Yeah.
Brett Christophers Yeah. Hopefully it's worthwhile. We'll see.
Well, your first still, you know, of all the people we've interviewed and all the things we've talked about,
the first interview we did with you, which was about asset management and your brilliant book,
Our Lives and Their Portfolio.
Brett Christophers Yep.
Brett Christophers Brilliant book.
I think that's got something like 300,000 views by now. I never expected that. You know,
I thought maybe if it gets 100,000 views and we're taking that to really, you know, a broader audience,
then usually talks about asset managers. Great.
Brett Christophers Yeah. Awesome.
Brett Christophers But clearly,
clearly people are really interested in that stuff.
Brett Christophers Yeah.
Brett Christophers Do you think that interest in asset management, the likes of BlackRock,
Blackstone has increased in the last couple of years? And if it has, why?
Brett Christophers Yeah, that's a great question. I mean,
it's clearly increased. I mean, the big uptick in interest and awareness was from around the time of
the financial crisis for reasons we talked about then, which was the fact that there was a partial
kind of displacement of the classical kind of power brokers within the finance sectors, which banks,
investment in commercial banks, you know, the Goldman's, the Morgan Stanley's and so on by the Blackstone
and the Blackrocks and the KKRs. And so that absolutely occurred during the 2010s. But it does
seem I agree with you that it seems to have kind of ratcheted up another level in the last few years. I
don't know what the exact reason for that is. I think that in the UK case, I think it's that
there, there is a greater awareness of companies like Blackstone and Blackrock, not least because
they get, you know, invoked and sort of curried to by the political class here in a way that I
don't think happened before. So I think in the UK, that's probably the explanation for why there's been
an uptick. You know, Starmer likes his photo opportunities and Rachel Reeves as well, you know,
has her infrastructure council talking to the Blackstones and Blackrocks about investing in
Britain's future and so on and so forth. So I think there has been an uptick. But I think the
other thing is that there's just there's been a lot more. I mean, I noticed this having been part
of the phenomenon. There's just a lot more stuff being written about that world now, particularly
private equity, but not only private equity. There's been a slew of books on both sides of the
the Atlantic in the last few years. And there's more coming. You know, I know of at least two or
three really good books that are coming as well. So there's just a lot more being written about it.
So I think there's a bunch of different reasons. So I, you know, I'm as surprised as you were by
the 300,000 views. But I think people are realising that these actors have a really significant
impact on our daily lives. And that was not obvious until relatively recently.
I think another thing as well is that they draw criticism from both the left and the right for
different reasons. So I wonder how many people they see asset management. And they think this
guy's going to talk about ESG and Pride Month, you know, and debanking and Coutts and Farage. And
I know your views on, well, I know some of your views on that stuff. But you're talking about
something quite fundamentally different. But it's interesting that there are quite strong talking
points from both sides of the political spectrum. Absolutely. And I know, you know,
I think the best example of that is the growing involvement, particularly since the financial
crisis of the likes of Blackstone and so on, in the US in the ownership of housing, in the ownership
of rental housing, and in particular rental housing for not particularly wealthy people. And you get
equal amounts of criticism of that from the Elizabeth Warrens on the left and the Josh Hawleys
on the right. They are, it's, you know, it's the one, you know, they wouldn't talk to each other about
it. But they're basically coming with the same arguments that these types of kind of rapacious
actors shouldn't be involved in owning these types of assets. And as you say, it's one of the very,
very few things where left and right kind of see to eye to eye. So it's very interesting that it
continues to happen regardless. And what do you think of the ESG angle? We didn't really talk
about that much. Well, yeah, so ESG is a really interesting one. And ESG is basically dying,
is my view on this. This is the woke capital. What does ESG mean? Let's start with that.
So ESG stands for environmental, social and governance. It's kind of a not very catchy title,
ESG. But the basic idea was, and it really took off from kind of around the mid 2010s, late 2010s.
The basic idea was that investors, professional investors, were going to start taking ESG criteria
seriously. So when they carried out their investment, they would try to channel that
investment towards firms who take environmental and social concerns seriously. And environmental
has always been the main part of it. The S and the G have been a lesser part of it.
And I think there were two or three different rationales for why they did that.
I think the first was there were definitely people in the investment world who believed
that investments would generate a superior return. If you invested in environmentally
friendly companies, they would generate better returns. They'd be more profitable.
You know, green capitalism is this kind of wonderful thing, which is going to save the planet
and it's going to make people a lot of money. So some people believe that. I don't think many
people believed it, but some people definitely believed it. I think the second thing was PR. I mean,
it was clearly a significant PR angle to it. It was, you know, you have to be on board that train,
or there might be some pension funds who will not give you their money to invest if you're not
investing it in an ethically progressive way and all the rest of it. And then I think the third thing
was just from a competitive angle. It was very much about, this is how we're going to enhance the
level of capital that is coming to us to invest. There was a whole range of different reasons
why people were doing it. And I think what's happened over the last two or three years is that
people have given up on that. And I think they've given up primarily in the U.S.
U.S. and I think they gave up for two main reasons. So one was they realized that green capital is not
such a great investment opportunity after all. The returns on renewables companies have been terrible
for the last two or three years. And so I think that sort of part of the rationale disappeared.
But then I think the other thing that's happened is that I think it became clear,
particularly in the U.S., much less so in Europe, I think, that actually a lot of investors didn't care
as much about these things as they had been led to believe. And so at the end of the day, I think,
you know, the big asset managers have basically realized that their clients ultimately just want
them to maximize investment returns. And so the idea that you have to at least maybe pretend the wrong
word, but at least give the impression of investing in an ethically progressive way has become less
important because they realize you don't have to do that to remain competitive. So lots and lots of
funds with an ESG focus have been shut down and so on the U.S. side. But I think it's happening in
Europe now. I think, you know, I have an old friend who was until recently head of ESG at a major European
asset manager. He got fired a couple of months ago and people across that part of the industry are
losing their jobs. I think it's a... Did he tell you why he got fired? Because I think companies are
realizing that ESG is simply not something they have to invest in as part of their business model,
to the extent that they felt that they had to previously. Yeah. So I wonder, you've outlined the
economic rationale, which makes total sense. Actually, we should just focus on our bottom line,
maximize shareholder returns, etc, etc, etc. I wonder if there's also another side to that,
which is post-Trump 2016, there was just such a massive political blowback to a lot of this stuff.
And even for people who might actually believe in some of it a little bit, they just think,
you know what? Bugger this. I cannot be bothered. Sod it. You know, let's just not do it. It's not worth it.
I think that's true in the U.S. But the fact it's also happening in Europe, I think,
is what's really telling because you don't really have that political blowback in Europe. But that
disinvestment is occurring regardless. I mean, I think it's, to my mind, and you know, maybe this
is being overly doomerous about it. To my mind, it's part of a, this is part of a broader phenomenon,
where I think that in the five or six years after the Paris, after the Paris Climate Agreement,
which was 2015, 2016, there was significant hope amongst large parts of the population and the
professional classes that governments were getting serious about climate and that they were going to
take measures, whether that's, you know, significant carbon taxes or whatever else it might be, that would,
that would really entail a shift away from fossil fuel led capitalism. I think that what's happened
over the last three or four years in particular, is that the realization has kind of dawned and people
don't really want to say explicitly, but I think people are sort of implicitly seeing it, that it's not
happening. And that the governments are actually not serious about taking the types of actions that are
necessary to keep temperatures at two degrees, two and a half degrees, you know, forget 1.5 degrees.
Two and a half. Governments aren't serious about keeping temperatures to two and a half degrees.
I mean, of course, they're not going to say that. But no, I don't think they're remotely serious about
it. I mean, so I was in Norway recently. And so in May 2021, the International Energy Agency came out
with this really, I think, an incredibly significant report, which they called it net zero by 2050. And they
basically said, look, to have for the energy sector, which is obviously the very heart of the climate
problem, for the energy sector to be able to be net zero, not actual zero, net zero by 2050, this is
the kind of path it has to take over the next 29 years, whatever it was, 2021. So the next 29 years.
And they basically, for that to be possible, there have to be, there can be no new approvals
of oil and gas field development and no new approvals of coal mines anywhere in the world
from this day forward, none, zero to have any chance of hitting net zero by 2050. And so I, as I
said, I was in Norway a few weeks ago, over 160 approvals of new oil and gas field development
license have been approved just in Norway since May 2021. So no, no, the government's on remotely
serious. Oil and gas field development license have been showered like confetti around the world
since then. And so I think the investment world looks at what governments are doing, and they say
governments, which have to be the ones that take the lead, are not serious about this. So why should we
be serious about this? If governments are not taking the types of actions that will make
fossil fuel investments less profitable and green capitalism much more profitable, why, why would
we bother with ESG? So two questions then one is, and I can, I can hear, you know, somebody who watches
GB news followed, follows Farage on social media, maybe votes reform. I hope those kinds of people
are watching this because I think you've got important things to tell them. I can hear them say,
so Britain is not granting any new oil and gas licenses in the North Sea. This gentleman is
saying that other people are, and that's why we're not going to meet those targets anyway.
Is the UK governed by schmucks? That makes no sense. No, it's a good question.
What's your view there? Yeah, I think there's a very simple answer to that, which is that, well, first of
all, there are certain new oil and gas fields where it remains a little bit unclear in the UK whether
they're going to be developed or not. They're subject to legal objections at the moment that
are still in the courts. But the bottom line that people need to understand about the UK
is two things. So first of all, the North Sea is one of the most kind of exhausted, exploited hydrocarbon
basins in the world. All the readily exploited resources have, for the most part, already been
exploited. So what's left is very, very hard to get at. And accordingly, it's very, very expensive
to extract. And so if you look at a chart that shows you the kind of per barrel cost of extracting
the remaining hydrocarbon reserves in the Earth's crust, I don't know, in Saudi Arabia, which I think
is the cheapest, it's like $5 a barrel. In the UK, it's like $80 a barrel. So there's a marginal cost to
it. And so the profitability of future extraction from the North Sea is very, if it occurs,
is relatively marginal in a global context. So of course, the UK government doesn't care that
much about it. It cares about the employment aspects of it. Absolutely, it cares about what
happens to rig workers and people involved in the processing industry and so on. But in terms of
industry revenue, industry profitability and tax revenues, royalty revenues from the North Sea,
it's pretty marginal. So it's much easier from an economic perspective for the UK to give up its
reserves than, say, Saudi Arabia or Venezuela or somewhere, places like that, where there's enormous
amounts of abundant and very, very cheaply extracted oil and gas to extract. So that argument about,
you know, the UK doesn't, it's not a complicated thing. Oil and gas extraction has completely different
political economics in different parts of the world.
So you think the UK shouldn't be doing it? Do you think there's an argument to be taking it?
Because you've said...
Well, I mean, the only concern, I mean, absolutely, I think from an environmental perspective,
of course, everyone should be shutting it down. But that's not, you know, that's not realistic or
credible right now, given that that, you know, if you shut down oil and gas production globally,
you'd have all sorts of, you know, problems in terms of shifting demand at the same time as shifting
supply in terms of energy. What I'm saying is that it's a straightforward decision. It's not like the
UK government is being really bold politically in giving up what remains of the UK's oil and gas
resources, because it's not giving up very much economically in the way that many other parts of
the world would be. So I think when you hear Labor saying, you know, we're going to stop oil and gas,
it's like, it's not that big a deal. It's a very easy decision at the end of the day.
It's less of a big deal than people might initially think.
Much less of a big deal, much less. There's not much left, and it's very expensive to extract.
So the economics of it are not wonderful.
So just to be clear, for people thinking that I'm saying that the UK should be drilling new oil and
gases, I'm not saying that. I'm ventriloquizing an argument which says, well, it's pointless,
given that other people are doing that anyway. And of course, you mentioned Norway.
Norway is a great case in point. I think, well, you'll know this better than I will,
something like 60, 70% of new cars bought in Norway are now electric vehicles.
It's all funded by oil and gas money.
It's all funded by oil and gas money, and they've got rising living standards,
and they've got great public transport. And so I wonder, you know, there's an argument there.
Well, if there was revenues being generated through this stuff, would it be able to pay for,
for instance, EV infrastructure in this country, charging stations, charging points, etc., which,
quite frankly, we are not building it. It's not happening.
Yeah. And let's be under no illusions about this. The Norwegians are, you know, fundamentally
contradictory about this stuff. Even many on the left in Norway make the argument, it's better that
we extract the oil and gas because we extract it, this is what they say, we extract it in a more
environmentally friendly way than Saudi Arabia and Venezuela and Russia does. So it's better that we
do it than that they do it. The converse argument is, of course, you are like one of the richest
countries in the world. So if any country is in the right position to be able to make the move away
from fossil fuels, from an advantageous existing position, it's you, but they don't want to hear that
argument. Interesting. You mentioned as well, a moment ago, one of your good friends being involved in
ESG, a major asset management firm. Yeah. Like I say, I think your best book of the recent four
that you've written is Our Lives and Their Portfolios. I think it's brilliant. You've written these
other books as well, though, but let's stick with asset management for a minute. I didn't know this,
Brett, but you used to play for the other side. I did play for the other side. You used to work for
PricewaterhouseCooper. I did. So tell me a bit about your trajectory then, because people, I think,
again, might be listening to this interview or your previous interview and they think, here we go,
another academic talking about the real world of finance and money, but actually you've been in
both worlds. So how did that come about? How does somebody go from PricewaterhouseCooper to being
a Marxist geographer talking about decarbonisation? So I did. I spent seven years in between
my master's degree and my PhD out of academia working in consulting, basically management consulting,
strategy consulting in London. And I started that with what was then actually Coopers & Lie brand,
which was one of the forerunners to PricewaterhouseCoopers. And while I was there, which was between
1997 and 2000, it merged with Pricewaterhouse, became PricewaterhouseCoopers. Yeah. And I worked in
consulting and it was an incredibly valuable experience because pretty, for living in that
world, working in that world, working in, I guess, what you might call the belly of the beast for seven
years, I learned pretty much everything I know today about how that world works by working in that
world, right? I mean, but just by seeing how capitalism works from the inside. And that's the
great thing about being a management consulting, right? You go and you work with all these different
industries. And basically what you do is, you know, they pay you to basically learn about how
their industry works. And one of the many reasons why I realized that I didn't want to do that long term
was that it's kind of a farcical when you think about it, in the sense that you're kind of going in
there telling them to give you, you know, hundreds of thousands of pounds to tell them how to run
their businesses. And you kind of realize, no, no, no, we're not the people you should be asking
really about this. And so I knew that, you know, I couldn't, once, if I stayed in that business
long enough that you get to the level where your business becomes sales, going in and telling the
businesses to give you the money, that I would never be able to do it because I didn't believe it.
I just, I didn't believe in the business world, but you learn a heck of a lot. I mean, it's an
incredibly privileged life that you lead because you go, you know, you're kind of parachuted into
these companies and you learn a huge amount in a short amount of time about how companies and
industries work. And that's been massively valuable to me as an academic, looking at the same world,
but asking a different set of questions about it, right? That's the difference is that I'm now asking
different questions other than, you know, how to maximize the revenue or the income that those
firms might make. So yeah, I did that for, I did that for seven years. And it was really,
and it was refreshing and it was really, it was instructive and refreshing for all sorts of different
reasons. One of which is you kind of, what you realize is that, you know, a lot of the kind of
moralizing left critique of that world doesn't cut it. You know, I constantly hear colleagues
make generalizations about, you know, the corporate world, the commercial world, and about the type of
people that work in that world. And of course, to the most, for the most part, that's just not true.
Most of these people are just same people like other people who just ended up in that world
because they need to earn a living. And we live in a capitalist society. So of course,
most people work for capitalist organizations. That's just the reality of it. And that doesn't
make them bad people for doing, for being in that world. Most people are in that world because that's
the world we live in. And it was also in strange ways, it was quite a collegial world. One, you know,
being an academic is nothing if not working in a, in a relatively egocentric environment and a
narcissistic environment. That's so interesting. And in the corporate world, it wasn't like that.
You know, in my experience, it wasn't like that. Everyone at the company that you work for wants
the company to do well, because if the company does well, everyone does better. So in many ways,
it was much more kind of team based and collegial than academia is, in particular, leftist academia.
That is so interesting. So the mindset at somewhere like PricewaterhouseCoopers or McKinsey or any of
these kinds of consultancies is more inclined to cooperation than academia.
That was my experience. Parts of academia. And obviously there is, obviously there is kind of
elbowing and so on in that world. But absolutely, I found it, you know, the stereotype, my point is
that the stereotypes just are not necessarily particularly helpful.
Do you think consulting is a grift? So Mariana Mazzucato says that, you know, actually lots of,
there's no net value created by consultants with regards to the public sector, like lots of it just
shouldn't be happening. I think again, again, that's a generalization. And is it a net grift for the
public sector? I think that there are, I would say on balance, it's a negative phenomenon. Absolutely.
And I think that it's become a self-reinforcing thing whereby the public sector has been hollowed out
of expertise by outsourcing stuff to consultants and thereby it becomes a vicious circle because it
no longer has the expertise to do a lot of the things it needs to do. So it becomes a dependent
relationship. And there are lots of times when not just public sector, but also private sector
companies use consultants when they definitely don't need to. They do it so that executives can kind
of have a crutch to lean upon and say, well, you know, McKinsey said to do this. So, you know,
don't blame me. You've got to be fired. Yeah. So there's all, there's all, you know, there's,
there's all sorts of bad reasons for, but you know, I, so I, when I left PricewaterhouseCoopers,
I went to work for a very small consultancy, like 15 people, 20 people, which, which was full of,
and it was focused specifically on the media sector. And it was full of people who came from that world,
who were unbelievably knowledgeable about that world. And they did, you know, and I was able to
work on a series of, you know, many, many consultancy projects where I have no doubt
there was an enormous amount of value added to those organizations. So it, you know, it, it's
impossible to, to generalize about it, um, in, in the way that I think, you know, Marianna in that,
in that book and with Rosie Collington in that book, I think there's a lot of,
there's too much generalization there, but absolutely the public, the public sector reliance
on consultants, particularly in the UK has for sure go, gone much too far. Um, I don't think,
I don't think there's any doubt about that. Um, whether that's going to change over the next few
years, I guess remains to be seen. I think, you know, you'd know this better than me, but I think
Labour have made some, at least some positive noises about reducing the reliance of the public
sector in the UK on their consultant. Are you happy you did what you did? So,
and, and is it something you said you're happy? Uh, let me rephrase that. Is that something you'd
recommend other people to do then? So if there's a young person watching this or not so young,
and they've just finished their degree or master's degree, you know, they have left-wing
politics, progressive views, they're critical of capitalism as it exists. They might even be a
viral media supporter. And, you know, they want to apply themselves to a profession, a mode of being,
which changes the world in a, in a, in a better way that moves away from our, from our present
economic model. Would you say to them, look, there's absolutely no harm in going to work for
PricewaterhouseCoopers, McKinsey? Oh, a hundred percent. Yeah, a hundred percent. It's a fantastic
thing to do. It's a smart thing for left-wingers to do. Yeah, a hundred percent. Absolutely. I mean,
if you, if you absolutely, I mean, the more you know about the world that you want to
ask searching questions of, then of course you're going to give better answers to those questions.
The risk of course, is that, and this happens to lots of people, is you get sucked in, right? And
you start getting paid, you know, half decent money. And they say, we're going to, you know,
raise your salary by 5,000 pounds next year. And maybe you start to acquire some taste that become
dependent on those things. And, and after a certain point of time, I think for a lot of people,
it becomes unimaginable to go back to working in another sort of, you know, so when I quit, when
I, I'm 50, what am I now? 53. When I quit that business, I was 33 and I don't, and I, and I,
You had kids by then. I did. I have two kids by then. And, and, and I was by no means a high,
a high earner. I mean, I was in a consultancy. It wasn't, it wasn't a major consultancy and it was not,
and even there, it was like nothing like banking salaries. I still don't earn 20 years later,
anything like I earned when I was 30. No, not even close. 20 years later?
Not even close. Wow. Yeah.
And people who don't, we, we, well, you know, we'll say this repeatedly. You're a,
you're an academic at Uppsala University in Sweden. Yeah. I have a full professorship and,
but I'm not even close to what I earned when I was 30, 33. And, and, and as I said, I was,
you know, I wasn't on a, I wasn't on a particularly high salary. Is your wife upset with you?
No. Come on. You know, has that never entered the conversation? No.
You know, I quite fancy that, that chalet and rural Sweden. Please go back to.
Yeah. So of course people get, people get stuck in that world. Of course they do.
I reckon my wife would say, Aaron, you know what? Fuck up your ideas. Especially if we had three kids.
Anyway, I commend you. That's a real accomplishment. But I live, you know,
we've talked about this part. I live in Sweden. My two of my sons are at university. It's free.
Well, yeah. Why do you need to write? It's free and they get a grant.
That's interesting. If you, if you were in the UK and you had three kids and two want to go to
university, they want to get in the housing market, you'd probably say to yourself,
maybe you do need to earn some more money. Yeah. And I had a, you know, I had a good,
you know, I know we're getting straying off topic a little bit, but I was, I was in the States recently
to talk to a friend who, who's an academic in the US and his eldest daughter had just started
college and one that she didn't end up going to this, but one of the college she, she was on her list
that she wanted to go to. The annual fees were over $80,000 a year. Presumably it was out of state.
Yes. Yeah. But still, I mean, it's, it's, it's a, it's a lot of money. So absolutely. Absolutely.
That's, and then, you know, this is brings us back to our topic of, of, of capitalism, right?
I mean, you get, there are structural forces that shape all of the decisions we make on a,
on a daily basis. And so, yeah, I mean, it is, you know, your question, is it worth going to work in
that world? Absolutely. But you need to go into that world with your eyes wide open and you need
to keep open doors for, to, to be able to get back out of that, of that world. And of course,
things like age matter, but, but academia, I think in general is, is pretty, is, I think is pretty good
about this, particularly outside the UK. I think in, in North America and in Scandinavia,
lots of people spend a lot, a lot of time doing other things before going into academia. Whereas
in the UK, I think it's still relatively young person's game in terms of the, at the entry level.
It's interesting you say this because I mean, one of my, one of my closest friends is a quantity
surveyor and he works in the Gulf and he works these massive projects, right? You know, building stadia
and Gata and whatever. No one, he's not left wing, but he has a critique of capitalism, you know,
and he's seen close up like the amount of waste and just useless people in very, you know, powerful
positions, et cetera, et cetera. So he has a critique. And I'm thinking, I've often thought this actually,
if you did have a radical left government, you're going to need hundreds, thousands of people like him
to quote, come back home, something like HS2. Okay. We want to build HS2. We want to build Northern
powerhouse rail. We cannot continue with the kind of costs spiraling as we've seen them. You're going
to need, it sounds absolutely mad. You're going to need left wing quantity surveyors. You're going to
need left wing QSs. And I think the conversation around left wing politics in the country is completely
tone deaf to that. It thinks actually a successful left wing project would have thousands of people like
me and you, right? No, I totally agree. Content creators and academics and journalists,
you'll need some of that, of course, to shift the political and cultural conversation, of course,
but to actually administer the state, to actually run things, we're going to need people who work
with spreadsheets and use their hands and have to problem solve in really agile ways every single day.
I agree. And it's funny you should say that. I went to a talk last week in Stockholm at KTH,
which is the engineering university in Stockholm. It's Sweden's biggest engineering university,
trains its engineers, basically. But it also has a history of ideas department, history of science
department, which is where there's lots of kind of lots of lefty people. And they invited a guy
called Tim Mitchell, Timothy Mitchell, you've probably heard of, wrote Carbon Democracy,
Verso book, brilliant book, to come and give this annual lecture. And so he gave this lecture and it was,
I was kind of sitting there wondering who was in the audience, thinking there's engineering school.
And there were obviously lots of people, not just from the university,
people came down from Uppsala, there were lots of lefty people there. But when it came to Q&A
afterwards, one of the people sitting in there said, you know, I'm an undergrad doing an engineering
degree here at KTH. And he said, Tim, what would a left wing engineer look like?
And Mitchell had no answer to that question, but it was a really interesting question,
because it's exactly what you're getting at. You should have an answer.
Well, what's really interesting with the Green Party in this country is that,
and I think this is interesting, right? So you've got the Labour Party,
the cadre they build upon is really the NGO, legal services, industrial complex, right? People who,
who basically bullshit for a living, okay? Academia as well, for some extent.
Then the Green Party, Carla Denya, engineer, Sean Berry, I think has an engineering background. I think
Caroline Russell, engineering background. And it's really interesting for me. There's a few others,
too. They've got four or five women at the top of that organization who come out of, you know,
applied sciences, engineering, STEM. And I think that's, that to me is like one of the few bits of,
that's a good data point, right? There's lots of bad ones.
Yeah, no, absolutely.
There's lots of bad ones, and it makes them very empirical, very analytical. And I'm going to take,
I'm going to take your analysis of like the climate crisis so much more seriously
because of that background. I have a question for you. This is, this is all really off topic,
but I'm really enjoying this, Brett. Is it bad for the left that we generally,
because you said that there was a more collegiate approach at what is now PricewaterhouseCoopers when
you worked there than in left-wing academia, which is more individualistic, more atomized,
in a way counterintuitively more competitive. Is it a problem for the left that political lead,
what the anglophone left, that political leadership often comes from people in journalism, academia,
NGOs, whilst political leadership on the right can often come from business, consulting. And
that means that they engage with a wider range of people. They can access a wider range of problem
solvers. Actually, sometimes they're better at working with one another in a way that the left isn't.
I mean, I'll phrase this in a particular way. I look at reforms MPs. You've got two of them in
particular, Rupert Lowe and Richard Tice, who come out of business. Now, I don't agree with pretty much
anything they say, actually. I mean, Richard Tice is right on water nationalization. That's about it.
Yeah.
Yeah. But what's interesting for me is how-
It was Rupert Lowe. It was either Southampton.
That's right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
That's right. But it's interesting to me how willing they are to compromise with one another
politically for a radical political project, which actually is kind of unthinkable on the left.
Yeah. I mean, I think that's the point about compromise, I think is very, very important,
which is that obviously in the business world, you can't get anywhere without compromise. And I think
that's a really, really important point. So I'm not sure my answer to the question of whether it's a
problem that it is that way. But I definitely think that a greater openness to people from
different backgrounds can never be a bad thing. Absolutely. And I think, you know, maybe I'm wrong
about this, but my feeling at least in the UK context is that the left, there used to be greater
diversity in the backgrounds of people that came into, into left politics in the UK than there is
today. And I think that's, I think that isn't, I think that's significant. My impression now is that
where the left is politically in the UK, at least, at least the center left, let's put it this way. I
think they, they have a very strange relationship with business where there's on the one hand,
very little experience of business. But on the other hand, there's a, there's a very much like,
we want to work with business, and we want business to fix things for us. And that is a,
a really kind of contradictory position, it seems to me. And I think, and I think we see the results of
that, which is, you know, maybe we'll talk more specifically about this later, whereas where you
do have, where you do have Keir Starmer saying things about wanting, you know, BlackRock or the
likes to take a lead in doing certain things, or, or, or assisting the UK and taking, and taking the UK
in certain directions in terms of investment, and so on, that are actually, that are actually,
completely, completely ignorant about what BlackRock is as an organization, how it actually works.
And so I think that's kind of a microcosm of this, of this, of this broader problem, which is like this,
this, I'm not sure what the word I'm grasping for is, but there's this, this issue where you have this
reliance on business, and kind of belief in business, but a complete lack of understanding of
what's actually going on in that world. And, and that's the way I, that's the way I would put it.
That's really sharp, because again, like, it's so fascinating for me to look at the Labour project
now. And by the way, when we talk, when we talk about the left, I'm not just talking about the
radical left, I'm talking about the centre left as well, but actually, in this respect, they have
similar traits, I think. I think partly as an outgrowth of so many people going to university, I think.
I mean, I think that, I think that the difference, of course, is that this is that the centre left
has a belief in the kind of, the power of business to deliver a kind of a soft capitalism,
or whatever, which the, which the, the genuine left, whatever you want to call it, doesn't have.
That's the big difference, of course.
But I think the thing that they share is a, is a relatively, a lot of the time, of course,
there are exceptions, but I think what they share in large part in the UK is a, is an unfamiliarity
with how that world actually, with the realities of that world.
That's exactly it. And I, you know, I've, I've said this a few times, but you'll see Rachel Reeves,
and Keir Starmer, and Jonathan Reynolds, and Peter Kyle, and Wes Street, and the whole Labour,
and Bridget Phillips, and Liz Kendall, and they'll all talk about business. And I'm thinking,
none of you have ever worked in the private sector. None, none of you. By the way,
you don't have to, you know, Nye Bevan never worked for the private sector.
I'm not saying you have to, but Nye Bevan didn't also wax lyrical about the private sector.
No, exactly. Exactly.
And they have, they have literally, like you said, this is interesting,
inverse correlation between the more they talk about the power of business,
the less they actually know about that world.
100%. That's exactly right.
Very, very strange. You know, Wes Street was like a, he worked as a,
sorry, he worked as a consultant, I think for about 10 minutes. Liz Kendall. I mean,
mostly these are people that just, like I say, NGOs, lawyers, journalists, guilty,
and then political industrial complex. Actually, a lot of them weren't even counsellors,
at least that's something you've got some familiarity with delivering stuff at a local level.
And that is really, I mean, Starmer's the power, I love business, the power of the free market.
The amount of times I've seen these quotes, Brett, and I think, if you love business so much,
why didn't you start one? Yeah.
Why were you a lawyer for decades? By the way, if you like being a lawyer, great. We need lawyers,
sadly. But if you love it so much, why be a lawyer? Let me read this quote to you and then
I've talked a lot. You can respond to this. Because it's exactly what you're talking about
with that attitude. Keir Starmer, and then he specifically mentions BlackRock. So this is in
a now famous tweet recently. And it was, I think it was him alongside Larry Fink, right?
Yep. CEO of BlackRock.
Yep.
Asset management firm. I'm determined to deliver growth, create wealth and put more money
in people's pockets. This can only be achieved by working people in partnership with leading
businesses like BlackRock to capitalize on the UK's position as a world leading hub for investment.
I mean, that sounds like an advert. What do you make of that tweet?
Well, I mean, I think that, I mean, there's all sorts of things that can and indeed have
been said about that tweet. So the thing that stuck with me when I think about what he said there
is this idea that BlackRock is actually a business that does things, which is not what it does. So
there's this, I think somewhere else, either him or Reeves, I'm not sure who it was, but one of them
talked about, you know, getting BlackRock on board in terms of building Britain's future.
And that idea, while kind of superficially interesting, it sort of flies in the face of what
the companies like BlackRock are, which is, you know, BlackRock's never built anything in its,
in its history. But BlackRock is, is simply an organization that exists by buying and owning
assets that generate income. That's, that's what it does. And the kind of messy world of building
things, whether it's infrastructure, whether it's housing, whether it's businesses, is the last thing
that the likes of BlackRock want to do, because that entails all sorts of risks and unpredictabilities
and uncertainties and things that can go wrong. And BlackRock's entire business is about not doing that
type of thing. It's about making sure that those types of risks are borne by other actors,
including governments, but certainly not BlackRock. So the idea that is kind of out there that Black,
that, that, that, that Starmer and Labour seem to be trading upon is, is the complete obverse of what
the likes of BlackRock are all about. It doesn't want to build things. It wants things that are already
there and it can own them on behalf of the investors whose, whose money it's investing because those assets,
whatever they might be, will generate a relate, a regular, reliable, predictable year with no
meaningful risk involved. And so renewable energy is the area that I know best in recent times. It's
a great example. So if you, if you, if you drive around Norway, for example, or Sweden, where I live,
BlackRock is the owner of many, many wind farms around Sweden, but it didn't build any of them. In fact,
it didn't put any money into the construction of any of them. It got on board and it gets on board
when those developments have been, or on the cusp of being finalized. And so when they get to the
point of being operational assets, generating the electricity and therefore generating the regular,
that's when BlackRock invests. It doesn't get involved at the earlier stage of doing,
because it doesn't like risk. So this whole idea of like building things through BlackRock is just like,
it's a, it's a complete nonsense. That's not what it does.
Do you think, do you think Keir Starman knows what he's talking about? So there's one,
there's one reading of that tweet, which is, look, you've had the budget. Basically,
you just want to signal to FT readers, the corporate class. We're not radical. Right. And I,
I, I, I don't agree with that. I understand that as a political thing. Or there's another reading,
which I think is correct, which is, he has literally no idea.
I think he has no idea. Yeah. I think he has no idea. I mean, I don't, obviously I don't know that,
but I don't think he has any idea. He probably doesn't know what the difference between
BlackRock and Blackstone is. I can imagine he probably gets the two of them confused. Many,
many people do. No, I don't, I don't think he has any idea at all. I think the, the one thing that
I do think that people in the UK thinking about this should do is look to, look to the example
in New Zealand. This is interesting. So I was in New Zealand, um, about a year and a half ago.
And while I was there, there was this, there was this great, um, sort of story that hit the news
while I was there that BlackRock and the New Zealand government had come to an agreement
that BlackRock was gonna, um, was going to set up this new climate infrastructure fund specifically
for New Zealand. Um, it was going to raise something like $2 billion to invest in climate
infrastructure. Closed or open fund? Um, I think it would be, it would have been a closed fund.
Absolutely. Um, and, um, and there was, and, and, and, and obviously the, the, um, the, um,
the political leader who had negotiated this, you know, traded on it in exactly the same way that,
that Starmer is doing, but this, there was something substantive here. A year and a half later,
as far as I know, BlackRock hasn't, has invested nothing in New Zealand. And obviously the reason is,
is that the New Zealand government hasn't put on a plate for BlackRock,
the types of investments that it would consider attractive enough to put it,
to put its money behind, which is to say those that are generating predictable annual yields of
eight, nine, 10 plus percent, those haven't been forthcoming. So that hasn't, hasn't invested.
So all the kind of political excitement about that has dissipated. And in fact,
the opposite has occurred, which was that just about two weeks ago, um, a solar installer that has
been in business for 50 years, that BlackRock became the majority owner of, I think a couple
of years ago, has had to file for administration because BlackRock pulled of it, pulled its investment
because it's not making enough money. So I think that, you know, that's where I would be looking
if I was in the UK interested in what the future of the UK's glorious relationship with BlackRock,
BlackRock might look like, look at what's going on in New Zealand. And it's not a particularly attractive story.
It's absolutely remarkable to me that almost by definition now, politicians, people who are
administering the state, don't believe the state can do anything.
I mean, I think that's a big part of the problem, right? Because partly because it's not the only
reason, Boz, but it's partly because that obviously gives an enormous amount of power to the people on
the other side of the negotiating table, right? If you're, if you are private sector asset managers,
and you know that governments don't have, or at least don't believe they have the option of
investing themselves, if you're not going to pony up the money for investment on terms that the
government considers attractive, then that puts you in a massively advantageous position.
But why do the politicians believe it? I mean, if you look at, look at, look at Notre Dame, right?
So in what, five, not even five years, less than five years, they raise, they crowdfund. This is
obviously, I'm not proposing that's how we do restoration of old buildings. But basically,
because this became a matter of national prestige, these incredibly wealthy families in French public
life, they donate for the most part, you know, money to this project. They donate all together,
donations coming in for Notre Dame about 740 million euro, I think. It's completely rebuilt,
the parts that are destroyed, and the rest of the building is clean for about 600 million dollars.
Happens, in other words, under budget, ahead of time, it's overseen by a French general,
who bizarrely dies halfway through this thing. My point is BlackRock probably couldn't deliver
that on that timeline. So I find it so strange that, you know, and in a crisis, of course,
people don't say, hey, call McKinsey about how we should do full mobilization. That's not what
happens when there's a moment of national crisis. We're all socialists in a crisis. And yet politicians
seem to, like Keir Starmer, they seem to sincerely believe that BlackRock,
the people like Larry Fink, have a better understanding of how to generate prosperity
in this country than Keir Starmer does. I mean, that would be a great question, actually, to put
Keir Starmer. And I don't know what the answer is to that. I don't know whether it's, I don't know
whether it's whether they actually believe that or whether they think that's what the electorate
believes. And so it would be to pursue a strategy based on that understanding is logical in one way.
If you as a politician believe that the electorate doesn't have any confidence in governments,
A, to do things themselves of those kinds, or B, to run the public finances on that,
to run the public finances on that basis through public borrowing and all the rest of it.
And so I don't know what the answer to that. I don't know whether it's,
they actually, you see what I'm saying? I don't know whether it's they, whether it's a genuine,
whether they've kind of drunk the kind of neoliberal Kool-Aid so much that they simply
believe that government shouldn't own these types of, own and operate these types of assets,
or whether they simply think that that's what the public believes, and therefore that they're going
to get kicked out of power by taking any kind of alternative strategy. I don't know what the answer to
that is, but it's one of those two things. Maybe it's a mix of the two.
I'm also going to quickly read an email from Jonathan Reynolds, who's a member of Cabinet.
This was an email he sent to a managing director at BlackRock in August, just so people realize,
this isn't just Keir Starmer, you know, for public consumption. This is a private email.
Partnership with the financial services sector. And again, I genuinely think Jonathan Reynolds
doesn't know what an asset manager is. I genuinely think he thinks, oh, bank, asset manager.
Same thing.
Yeah. It's just people that make lots of money.
It's money.
Yeah. Money. People that do stuff. A partnership with the financial services
sector will be critical to developing and delivering on our industrial strategy and supporting small
businesses. How does BlackRock help small business? How? The sector underpins UK investment and trade,
and its continued success is critical to lay the strong foundations for economic growth
that this country needs. He adds, I would like to thank you for your longstanding investment in the UK
and partnership in driving growth, jobs and innovation. BlackRock has an impressive reach
driving investment into the UK across sectors or economy, and your work is vital to economic growth.
Funding our priority projects and investment infrastructure is an important part of this.
We do not underestimate the importance, again, of the UK's financial services sector, he has no
idea what he's talking about, to the wider economy or its potential to help deliver social value
and the clean energy transition.
Yeah, it's just fluff.
Do you think?
Yeah, it's pure fluff.
Chat GPT.
Yeah, maybe.
Together, and this is the worrying thing, Brett.
Together we will change the face of our United Kingdom for the better.
Does he think BlackRock's a British company?
He's probably firing this off to somebody in New York. I mean, he has no idea, does he?
Anyway, enough of Labour. Sorry, Brett.
That's all right.
People are saying, Aaron's talking too much. I want to hear more from Brett. He's the smart one.
But, you know, I have a lot of anger about that.
Listen, Trump.
Yes.
Obviously, he's coming in January 20th.
Now, the insurgency behind Trump, we've talked about this a ton on the show,
is about rhetorically pitching family capital against global capital,
coastal elites, small businesses fighting back against the likes of Goldman Sachs, BlackRock, etc.
That's the political pitch.
What's the reality going to be like?
I mean, it's hard to imagine that anything is going to substantively change in the relationship between
the US government and capital, is my view.
But that part of capital?
Well, you know...
He could align himself more with the Silicon Valley, kind of, you know?
Yeah. I mean, I think absolutely from a...
What was it called? The broligarchy.
The broligarchy.
I mean, that definitely seems to be part of what he's doing, right?
It's in terms of kind of the cozying up to Silicon Valley.
It's definitely part of it.
But I don't think that there's any prospect or likelihood of any kind of
displacement of the centrality of the big asset managers at all.
I mean, those asset management firms have been very savvy in terms of making sure that they have
close connections with both the Republicans and the Democrats.
They're not stupid about this.
So Blackstone, the other black, famously donates very large amounts of money to both parties.
Its CEO is a close confidant of Trump.
Its COO was very close to Biden.
So they're very, very savvy about these things.
So I tend to think that not much is going to change on that front, personally.
But I think what is different, and as you say, you guys have been talking about this a lot,
and you know more about it than I do, is the relationship with Silicon Valley.
That seems to be the difference in terms of the political economy of the relationship
between capital and the state that's going to happen over the next few years.
But I don't think much is going to change on the relationship with the finance side.
So you've got Musk talking about cutting Doge by, cutting the US state by $2 trillion.
Using Doge, I can't remember the Department of Government Efficiency, that's it.
Yeah.
And of course, every Republican has been saying this since Reagan.
Every Republican president, you can get back further if you like, since Reagan.
And the indisputable fact, and this is something I spoke about with Roushia Sharma, who's on,
you know, the other side of the political divide, writes the FT's at Rockefeller Capitol.
So the indisputable fact is that the state has grown since the 1930s.
Reagan said he was going to shrink the state.
He doesn't shrink the state.
And I wonder, you know, the same with, it'd be really interesting if Elon Musk
significantly cuts the size of the US state, that would be without precedent, actually.
Do you think he's capable of doing that?
I, you know, that's beyond my, I think that's beyond my wheelhouse in terms of...
But why is it?
Because you're, you know, you're, you're, you're somebody who's...
Because it's speculation, I don't like speculating, that's why.
Yeah, but you're a historical, you're a, well, you're partly historical materialist.
And I wonder, you think, well, look, he's from a fragment of the capitalist class,
which is not, which is not, doesn't enjoy the same kinds of relationships.
He's been a disruptive force with regards to that fragment, i.e. Silicon Valley in the last 30 years.
Yeah.
I don't, I don't see where, I don't see where they're going to cut.
Like, I don't, I mean, they're not, the, the, the, the US state has grown.
Security state?
Well, that's the, that's the, the obvious one.
But do you genuinely think that that's likely?
I don't think it is.
Well, that's why I'm asking you.
I don't think, I don't think it's likely.
I don't, I think that, I think, I think it's, um, I mean, Musk, that, that kind of rhetoric,
maybe I'm wrong in this, but it reminds me of, of the, um, of the rhetoric of,
what was his name, um, in the UK?
Um, the guy who was going to change everything about the relationship.
Cummings.
Nominate Cummings.
They're very similar, yeah.
Yeah, it reminds me of the, it reminds me of the Cummings rhetoric.
And my impression with what happened, with what happens with, with Cummings was that,
was that once he kind of got his, got his kind of feet under the table and sort of,
and sort of saw the complexity of what the state actually consists of,
which is, which is a set of social relations rather than a, than a thing.
Um, the, the Musk will pretty soon lose interest actually, is my, is my guess in terms of, um,
trying to get his teeth into making significant changes in the operations of the state
of the kind that he's been talking about, um, because he'll realize that it's, that it's just
too much hassle is not necessarily going to be sufficiently beneficial for the business
interest that he has, which presumably at the end of the day is what he's interested in.
Um, and, and I think that things will just carry on much as they are regardless.
I don't think that he will have the patience.
He never strikes me as a particularly patient man.
Not that I, not that I know anything about him.
And I think that that type of project requires an enormous amount of patience and commitment,
which I, I don't expect that he's going to have given the range of interests
and, and things that he already has on his plate.
Um, so is your analysis that the America, that the U S state will just get bigger and
bigger and bigger, because I think people haven't realized this, but you know, it's running
record deficits now under Trump, under Biden, since away it's been in this really strange new world.
And clearly something comes to a head at some point because you're the global reserve
currency for a reason.
Well, maybe, I mean, I think that, um, I mean, that just seems to be one of those
issues where the can just continually gets kicked down the road, right?
They have these repeated sort of, um, standoffs where Congress says, we're not going to,
we're not going to increase the budget.
We need to worry.
And then it just, it gets resolved again and again and again, because of the fact that it
is the global reserve currency.
Um, and the fact that, you know, and the fact that people are going to continue to buy the debt
because of the relate, because of its standing as the global reserve currency.
And so I think that for as long as they can continue to kick that, kick it down the road,
they'll, they'll continue to do that.
And, and, and, and I think that at the end of the day, it seems to me, and this is based on my,
my reading of people that know more about this than I do, that for as long as the dollar remains,
the global reserve currency, they'll, they'll, they continue to have the power to do that.
So I think that seems to be the really critical question there.
Um, and, and, and given the, given the, the problems that China is facing at the moment,
it seems to me unlikely that that's going to change anytime soon.
Um, so I, you know, I, I, I, you know, I know that, um, there's a lot of kind of concern about,
um, what the sort of Trump Musk axis might do to us, to us government in that, in that particular
sense. But I, you know, I, I, I suspect that it's gonna, it won't change that much. Of course,
there's all sorts of other things that they're gonna, they're gonna change a lot. But I don't,
I don't see it on that front. Um, I think there's so much kind of path dependence there.
I think there's so much kind of inertia. I think there's so much that's kind of
built into the state and it's, and, and the, and the relations between state and, and, and,
and, you know, the insurance sector, the private sector, the finance sector, the relationship
with asset managers, that, that, that is not, that is not easily unwound is the, is the best
way I can put it. So what's really interesting for me is that the US, the US, okay, it's growing
at a really impressive pace by the standards of the G7. People don't talk about this enough,
partly because its population's increasing, right? I mean, China's is not. So when people say,
China's only growing by four and a half percent, yeah, it's all productivity growth. If you believe
those figures, it's all productivity growth. Its population's increasing and a lot of the growth
is debt leveraged. Yep.
So I think if you look really at the last, I don't know, the last seven or eight years or something,
basically a dollar of growth has meant a dollar, has been born of a dollar of public debt.
And that's, that's clearly not a viable solution. They're running these massive deficits to get the
growth they're getting. Fine. And the only, the only thing I would say about that-
They can't do that forever. They can't just have a growth model based on, what I'll say is this,
and you're saying that, look, the dollar won't run the global reserve currency. I agree with that.
And people have been saying that you can't run those, that you can't increase the deficits for
a long time. And it can, is my, is my view. I've been hearing that for-
Yeah, they've been saying, well, since the seventies, right? And that's true. The US has been running
deficits in the seventies, although you get this brief pause with Clinton runs a couple of surpluses,
but I think the scale of them now, clearly now I think capitalism has entered this,
is this moment post global financial crisis, but it appears to be getting worse to me,
which is without 0% interest rates or close to without government stimulus,
you literally don't get any growth. And that starts in 87 with Greenspan, Greenspan put like
the first time people start saying you need to stimulate an economy, which isn't in recession.
And that now seems to be the norm of a lot of Western economies, is they need a permanent
stimulus just to grow. And so I think that's one factor. And the second thing about the global
reserve currency, I agree. I agree with the super imperialism hypothesis and the US is unique in that
regard. But you also look at things like gold prices, Bitcoin, you look at other assets like
Swiss franc or whatever, Os dollar, whatever. It's tiny, but you can see people moving away from the
dollar, um, transactions between say China and Iran, which aren't using dollars, et cetera,
or Russia and Iran, Russia, China. Anyway, anyway, this is all speculation. It's interesting,
but it's all speculation. Yeah. And, and, and, and as you will have guessed that, that sort of,
you know, that sort of speculative stuff is when I get caught, I get cautious because I, yeah,
You're an empiricist. I am. That's exactly what I am. Let's go back to your wheelhouse,
as you put it. Uh, you wrote a fabulous book about land in an enclosure. Uh, and you've got
one of the statistics here is that since Margaret Thatcher's election in 1979, two million hectares
of British land, 10% of the country's total surface area has been sold off by public entities. Yep.
That is remarkable. Two million hectares sold by the public sector in the last 45 years.
That amounts to the largest privatization of land in this country's history. Tell me about that. And,
and what kind of entities are we talking about that are, that are part of losing two million hectares?
So most of it, if I remember the figures correctly, that book came out six years ago,
uh, incredibly enough, most of it, um, certainly proportionally, maybe also,
I think in absolute terms has come from local authorities who have been
cajoled, pressured, sometimes compelled to sell off land. And, and, and a lot of that would be,
you know, kind of, you know, the old local authority farming estate, allotments, playing fields,
residential land, obviously huge amounts of it has, you know, everyone knows about right to buy the
housing privatization. Well, the housing privatization was obviously by its very nature in
significant part of land privatization. Um, so a lot of it's come from, um, from local authorities,
huge amounts have come, has come from local authorities. Um, in terms of central government,
the main, um, the main loser, so to speak of being, I think the ministry of defense sold off a lot of
land, forestry commission, which is actually the UK's largest landowner of any type, has also sold off
lots of land. NHS sold off lots and lots of land. Um, so it's come from across the board, but, but
local authorities have been the real kind of nubbit of it. And of course, and of course we, that's part
and parcel of the story about kind of the death of municipal England that people talk about, which is
the fact that, you know, local authorities, you know, at the same time as, as they've had their grants,
um, you know, massively cut, particularly since the financial crisis. Uh, but also before that,
they've also had to lose and they've lost a lot of their asset base as well. They'd lost a lot of it
before the, uh, before the financial crisis came along. Uh, but then the other way in which they
responded to the, to the austerity drive in the 2010s where local authority, uh, grant budgets were
cut was by selling even more of their assets. So most of them have not got much left that they can
liquidate to keep their, to keep themselves afloat, which is precisely why lots of them
got into kind of those speculative property ventures. And, and, you know, it's very easy
to criticize them for that, where they, you know, took a punt on a new shopping center.
Well, Croydon's the biggest shopper, right?
Yeah, Croydon, but there's lots of other ones as well. Um, but you know, if you, if, if you don't
want to cut your social care budgets or your homeless, homelessness budgets, um, but you don't want to
increase council taxes and the government's reducing your grant, what else are you going
to do? You have to do something. So I find it, you know, I tend not to be too critical of those
councils because they've been put in the position by central government that they've ended up in.
It's not a, it's not a crisis of their own making in my view.
Yeah. The great, the great example at the moment is, um, Hampshire County Council.
And I think something like 83% of spending by Hampshire County Council is on social care,
child and adult, adult social care. Obviously most of it's adult, adult social care.
Find it quite interesting that you've got a place historically Tory voting,
you know, it's completely shafted by demographics and you know, do those people continue? Well,
they haven't voted Tory. Many of them voted Lib Dem the last election, but
what's the future for those guys? Because it seems to me as long as local authorities have to
do social care, which I think is insane. I think the national government should be in charge of that.
This just gets worse. I think combined with all the things you're saying. So you've got,
yeah, less resources, all these constraints and they're being expected to basically deal with the
demographic crisis. Doesn't seem very wise. Yeah. I mean, local authorities, like local governments,
like the kind of car crash, the long, the kind of, what's the metaphor for it? It's like the kind of
long running car crash of British political economy, really. It's in the constant crisis
and it has been for a long time and it's hard to see it getting better. I mean, there's lots of reasons
for that. But one of the main reasons for it, I think, is the degree of, you know, centralized
political power in the UK compared to other countries. I live in Sweden where most income
taxes are paid to local government. In the US, mostly income taxes are paid to local government.
The UK is obviously completely different. We pay all our taxes centrally. And so local governments
are very reliant on those disbursements from central government. And if those get cut back in the
way they were under George Osborne and have never recovered, then there's not much left. There's
not much left you can do. So it's a real, it's a real kind of signature fault line of the British
political system, which I think is consistently underreported in the UK because of the kind of,
you know, the obsession of the media class with what's going on in Westminster and London.
Well, we try and do better here at Novara Media. So if you like what we're doing,
having these conversations, you know what to do, go to NovaraMedia.com.
I support the links in the description below. The great piece on The Economist.
A while back, talking about precisely this, Gothenburg versus Bristol.
Right. I didn't see that piece.
Really good. And then, you know, you look at the quality of public transport in Gothenburg
compared to Bristol. Oh my God, very large city. It's a car crash. I mean, the traffic in Bristol
is as bad as the traffic in London. It's probably worse.
Right.
You think London is a mega city of 8 million plus people and Bristol is a provincial city of a couple
hundred thousand, greater area million. And anyway, and that's, and that, in that article,
they kind of outline how that's primarily an outgrowth of not really giving local politicians,
bureaucrats, enough money to actually solve the problems that afflict local people.
Yeah. I mean, the, the, and the, the really, the really sad thing, or one of the many sad things
about that story about land privatization that I told in that book is that, you know, the flip side to
the kind of denudation of, of the assets of the local government was the enrichment of a class
of property developers and financial institutions who in many cases, you know, picked up that,
that land, that property on a, on a song and has, and has, and has sort of made out like bandits from
it. In fact, I saw the case this week, there was the, the case that was reported this week.
And a classic example of that was the, um, ministry of defense in the married quarters,
in the married quarters estate, where in 1998, um, the, um, the ministry of defense sold off.
It's, it's the 30, whatever it was, I think it was like 40, 36, 40,000 homes, uh, married quarters
estate for the ministry of defense to private equity firm, Guy Hands's private equity firm
for, I think 3 billion pounds. And then over the, this was under major, right?
So 98 would have been major. That's right. Or no 90, no 96. Yeah, it's early. Yeah, it was 96.
It was before labor. It was the year before labor came in. It was 96. Um, and over the subsequent years,
uh, that private equity firm has sold off like, I think about half of that estate. And then this week
sold it, ministry of defense, defense bought it back for 6 billion. And it was like half, half the
size of it had been then. Um, yeah. And it's just a, it's just like a why, you know, why was that deal
done? It was like, anyone could have said at the time that it was an absurd thing to do. They locked
in. So they, they sold it and then leased it back. Presumably it was about, you know, the, the, the,
the look of the balance sheet. I think it was a deficit crisis at the time, right? Exactly.
Something like that. So it was all about, it was all, it was all about kind of the,
the, the, the appearance of the balance sheet. And so they, they sold it off and then immediately,
and then immediately leased it back on long leases of like 99 years or something at, at, at, at
predictably increasing rates over that time. And it's been an, it's been an absolute financial
disaster for the ministry of defense and they've now bought it back. China doesn't do this stuff.
That's why they're, that's why they're doing okay. Um, yeah, Xi wouldn't have that. It's interesting
as well. A lot of this stuff, the most wacky privatizations, another one is, is rail under major,
people make these grand ideological arguments for rail privatization.
It was privatized because of a balance sheet. That's like you said, it was because there was a
deficit crisis in the early nineties and they sold off some assets in order to make the numbers add up.
And we were running a surplus in what, 97, 98 because of those choices. Um, I mean, that's it,
that's what it boils down to. It wasn't because they thought private market system can do trains.
I mean, they think that as well, of course they do, but that wasn't the impetus.
Yeah. I mean, I think, I mean, the privatization story in the case, so obviously we were talking
about privatization of land. I mean, one of, again, one of the really interesting things
about the land story, you asked where it disappeared. A lot of it disappeared with
the state owned enterprises. So water companies in particular, when they were privatized,
they were privatized with lots and lots of land, which turned out to be not necessary for their
businesses. And so many of them became very, very large property developers, same in the electricity
sector. So national grid, one of the most profitable parts of the national grid business is property,
property development business, property rental business. And it, and it basically got sold off
for free to sold off the wrong word or given away for free. Um, so that's where a lot of coal,
a lot of the coal, um, when coal, uh, British coal was privatized as well, huge amounts of land
disappeared there then. And it all, it was all basically just given away for free. Why, why is
the state so, or the, the, the contemporary state, why is it so eager to get bad value when it sells
stuff? Why is it, well, it's like saying to, it's saying to the market, please screw me, please screw
me. I want as little money as possible for these assets. I don't, I don't know what the answer to that
question is. I think that, I think it would be fair to say that, that I think we have to say that
there's, that part of this is like, it's easy to say with hindsight. I mean, I think at the time
when a lot of these privatizations occurred, the, the way in which the economy subsequently developed
and, and the, and the growth in value that many of these assets subsequently achieved was not
necessarily, would not necessarily have been predicted by anyone. Um, so I think it's, it's obvious with,
with hindsight that terrible value is achieved. Um, and yes, I think there were some people that
said at the time we're, we're underpricing these assets. Um, but I think there were lots of people
that probably thought that some of these were reasonable prices. So, you know, it's, it's important
not to, to just sort of say, but there's no doubt that there's no doubt that lots of bad deals were
done. I mean, I think, look, surely there are people out there, there are still a sense, okay,
worst case scenario. We're losing hundreds of billions of pounds at worst case. Do they not
think in those terms or? I don't, you know, I don't, I don't know the answer to that question,
but I, I do think, I do think there was, there was a couple of things. So one of the,
one of the reasons of course, was that when you had the, the lot of the British privatizations,
there was the hope that the UK was going to become a share, like a shareholding democracy,
right? And that a lot of these firms were going to ended up being owned by the, the, the masses.
We were going to democratize asset ownership in a way that never, apart from housing, arguably,
never really, never really happened. And so I think that that was part of the, of the thinking
was the, the British people should be able to acquire their assets at a reasonable price.
That was part of it. I think that was definitely a part of it, which obviously you saw in the case
of council housing, but I think it was, it was a more generalized part of it as well.
And, but there's also, you know, the, the private sector has always been very, very good
and still is very, very good at saying, we, we are not gonna, we're not gonna take on ownership of
these, our ownership and custodianship of these types of assets, unless the risk of doing so is
taken away from our, is taken away from our shoulders. And that's a line that policymakers
have, have continually, have continually bought. So that's the second part of it.
And then I think the third part of it is that, you know, so many of these assets that were sold off
were natural monopolies in, to, to all intents and purposes, water, electricity, gas, you know,
only really telecoms because of the arrival of mobile ended up having any significant competition.
And there was always this argument that you wouldn't get super profits emerging in these
types of sectors like electricity and water and so on, because regulation would do the work of
competition in terms of kind of keeping profitability under control and so on. And British regulators just
failed historically, failed historically to do that. And so there was a period, I mean, it's,
I think it's changed a lot today when the chickens have kind of come home to roost in a lot of these
sectors, but there was, there was a long period of companies in those privatised sectors making out like
bandits because they, they gamed the regulatory system incredibly successfully. And so the expectations
that regulators would do a better job of ensuring that the benefits of any efficiency gains flowed
to the public rather than to those privatised companies, they failed in doing that basically.
And so I think that maybe the value at which those assets were sold would have looked better
retrospectively if regulators had done a better job of ensuring that the benefits of privatisation,
whatever, to the extent that they existed flowed to the public in part, as well as just to the
companies themselves. So I think there was a range of different answers there.
That 2 million hectares of land, which was sold on the cheap, how much did the public lose out on?
If we're looking at the change in values and I'm not suggesting that was intentional and benefit of
hindsight, et cetera, but how much have we lost out on in terms of selling assets on the cheap
and their subsequent price inflation?
Oh, tens of billions of pounds.
Tens of billions?
Yeah, tens, absolutely.
Yeah. I mean, even just, even just in, in, in, you know, in council, I mean, even just in council
housing, you look at the average value at which the prices at which those assets were sold, they
were sold at, you know, average discounts of what 50 to 60, maybe 70% in some cases to market value.
And at the, and at the times at which they were sold, you look at the times when they were sold late
eighties, early nineties, that was when UK, um, house prices were at their absolute historic
lowest point. And, and so you think about, you know, the, the change in value of those assets
since then, I mean, it's just an enormous amount of value in the hundreds of billions.
It could, I mean, it could, it could well be, it absolutely could well be, but it's at least tens
of billions.
And we don't really have that, you know, another one is of course, water, um, water's privatized in 89.
Since then they've burdened themselves with 60 billion pounds worth of debt.
I think 56 billion has been paid out to shareholders. So you're talking 116 billion,
just on those two things. And you know, we've not built a reservoir in this country for decades.
Thames, Thames water itself has said it needs 18 billion to upgrade infrastructure just to meet
needs. So that's just a, such a direct transfer of money away from the public realm into the pockets
of shareholders, corporate 0.1%. And that's just, that's just water.
Yeah. I mean, I think, I think, you know, the, the, in a way, the most damning indictment,
I mean, I know we shouldn't, we shouldn't need to resort to this and we don't need to resort to it,
but it's a telltale story, I think, is that eat like Martin Wolf at the Financial Times,
you read him. And, and I think his writing basically says that privatization essentially
across the board, maybe telecomers aside, has been a disaster in Britain. That's the,
that's the chief economics commentator at the Financial Times.
I've had a few people like on the right say that to me. And I, you know, I say, look, we can, you know,
it's under, it's, it's been, it has been a disaster.
Yeah. Yeah.
And telecoms was fortuitous because mobile came along to represent competition to landline telephony.
If that hadn't happened, probably would have been a disaster, but that's the, that's the only
possible kind of exception to that story. But the rest of the board has been a complete disaster.
Yeah. I had a, I had a, I had a journalist at City AM accept that I think on water and policing,
army housing, they're like the private sector should, should never have been doing this stuff.
Yeah, no, absolutely.
There was also, I'll stick on this point for a minute because I still think politicians don't
really get it. I saw Angela Rayner when she was making an argument to keep right to buy.
And she was saying, well, people want to buy their homes. They've lived in them for a long time.
They, you know, they should get some kind of a discount. And I'm thinking, okay, well, I'm the,
I'm the taxpayer. Let's say where I live, Portsmouth, you're a unitary authority. Why
should I subsidize that person to have a below market rate house? It makes no sense.
And then she's saying, but then the money can be put back into building a home. Well,
you're operating at a loss. No business would do that.
No, it's, there's never been a logic. There's never, it was, it was buy, I mean,
right to buy was buying consent from a subset of the population.
But there is the argument as well, if only they built new houses with the money they generated.
Well, you're selling below market and you're building at market.
You're going to lose a shit ton of money, which they still say, right?
Something that Angela Rayner would say, well, she doesn't now,
but I think because she literally hasn't really thought about it.
You know, well, we can sell these out and we'll use the money to build new homes.
So why, why should councils already buggered? Why would they operate at a loss with that stuff?
Yeah. I mean, how is it? I mean, how, I mean, don't get me started on how about housing is just,
you know, a cataclysmic disaster in the, in the UK. I mean,
but it's obviously not just about right to buy. It's about all sorts of other stuff as well.
But, but, and, and, and it brings, brings us back to asset managers. The, I, you know,
the idea that asset managers are going to help the UK build its way out of its housing crisis is,
is absurd. The last thing they want to do is add new supply. Because add new supply,
and there's a risk of rents going, of rents going down. So they want, they, if you read their annual
reports and you read what they say about where they buy housing, they buy housing in places that
are supply constrained and they expect to remain supply constrained because that's what keeps upward
pressure on rent. So the idea that those people who are telling you that as soon as they see new
supply coming on stream, they sell that they're going to build with like, they're, they're going
to fund the construction. I mean, it's just, it's, it's totally absurd.
Yeah. Stammer has this thing about build, build, build, but like you said, the incentives,
there are complete odds with the rentier model, which he has seemingly no problem with.
No, absolutely. They're completely at odds with the rentier model.
I've got one more question, which is, you know, you wrote, um, the asset managers book, what, 2022?
Yes. Yeah. Yep. Um, and now obviously we're in a world of, of less easy money.
Yes. Interest rates now 4.7, 4.75% UK Bank of England interest.
They've just held them, right? Yep. Yep.
Much the shire ground of this country's zombie companies all going buster. Now they can blame
the chancellor, lucky them, and actually goes deeper. Anyway, um, obviously a lot of that stuff
was zero or close to 0% interest rates, a lot of asset inflation and really underpins a
lot of the sort of economic model you're talking about. Yep.
But if interest rates are now permanently higher, because inflation is going to be
permanently higher for whatever reason, to what extent does that undermine the model of people
like BlackRock? Yeah, it's a great question. So I wrote, so I was finishing up writing that book,
21, 22 is exactly right. And in the last chapter, I sort of took a stab at trying to answer that
question, which was like, what does higher, what does higher inflation and higher, the combination
of higher inflation, higher interest rates mean for a business model that in many respects has
been dependent on very, very cheap debt. And I got it wrong. Actually, I think I, I basically said
they're going to, that, that it won't change much. And the reason I said that was that, um,
there were a bunch of reasons, but the main one I said it is that the types of investment that,
that I focus on in that book, which is investment in housing and investment in infrastructure of
various types, energy infrastructure, transportation infrastructure, all the rest of it. Yes,
that investment when carried out historically by asset managers has typically been leveraged.
There's a lot of borrowing involved, but both of those types of investments are known to be good
hedges against inflation, particularly housing, but also infrastructure. So it's, it seemed to me that
in an, in an inflationary environment, even if interest rates have gone up, that you will, you will
still get lots of investment going in there specifically as a hedge against inflation, because
that would be a better hedge against inflation than other asset classes. I think that in the house,
in the housing space, that has proved true. I think they've carried on investing very,
very significantly in housing around the world in the last, but infrastructure has been different.
If you look at infrastructure investment by asset managers, infrastructure funds since the beginning
of 23, it's fallen off a cliff because that cheap debt isn't, it hasn't been available to them.
Um, and, and that's changed the economics of, of it to a significant extent. So go back to some of the New
Zealand example I was talking about earlier. I think one of the reasons why they haven't put any money to
work in that space is because the debt that they've historically been relying upon to carry out those
investments is not available. So I think it's a real question. I think they've been waiting for interest
rates to come back down so that they can get that cheap debt to boost their returns and make the, you
know, and make the numbers work for them again. And, and, and in the UK, that case in particular,
that doesn't look like it's happening. If, if interest rates normalize around that level.
Which historically, that's what happened on New Labour. It's not like it's crazy high.
Absolutely. But that's, so, so people really need to understand. So what happened? So the reason there
was so much asset manager investment infrastructure in the 2010s was, was a lot to do with low interest rates.
And it wasn't just about leverage. It was about the fact that if you, if you are, if you look at
whose money asset manager investing, it's things like pension funds. And when pension funds invest,
they, they're looking for two things. They're looking for long-term capital gains. They want
the assets to go up in value, but they're also looking for reliable annual yields, annual income,
five, six, 7% incomes as the other thing they're looking for. Historically, when investors were
looking for investments that would yield that annual income, they invested in bonds,
they were investing in corporate bonds and in government bonds that would pay a five, six,
seven percent coupon per year. After the financial crisis, when interest rates fell to zero,
bonds didn't offer that anymore because bond yields fell to that level as well, or close to that level.
So asset managers like, well, what do we invest in now that's going to generate these, you know,
housing and infrastructure, rents, and infrastructure yields provided that annual income.
But now of course they can get it from bonds again. So infrastructure has become much less of an
attractive investment proposition than it was four or five years ago, including renewable energy
infrastructure. That, I mean, that's one of the big reasons why infrastructure investment,
including in renewables has stagnated in most parts of the world, apart from China in the last two
or three years, is because interest rates have gone up, have gone up again. So not only is the debt more
expensive, but there's a competing asset class where they can get those types of annual yields
that they're not dependent on an infrastructure for anymore. So again, brings us back to Keir Starmer.
Do you think Keir Starmer realizes this when he's having, when he's talking, when he's doing his photo
shoots with Larry Fink, that Larry, that Larry Fink is going to be much less interested in investing
in British infrastructure if interest rates are 5% than if they're 0%. It's going to be way less
interested in doing that. It's interesting what you say about green energy because, you know, since 2010,
the UK has laid down a ton of, basically, basically all of its solar and most of its wind since 2010.
And most people say, well, that's because of the, I mean, this is in one of your books, you know,
the declining costs of the technology, the experience curve is falling. And that's why things like wind and
solar in many parts of the world, including this country, have price parity now with fossil fuels.
It's not true. Well, in some part, I mean, I mean, in California or whatever, it's, you know, it's...
But what I mean by it's not true, the reason I say that is that the generating companies that have
been building the new infrastructure, they have typically not been the ones that have captured
the benefits of those costs. Those cost reductions have been competed away and have flowed to consumers.
They flow to consumers. So it's happened because of government support, a really good feed-in tariff
contracts for different scheme that supports investment and a carbon tax, but also presumably
the cheap money and cheap money. Absolutely. And now and that's gone, that's come to an end.
But I think, you know, I think the carbon tax one is really interesting. The UK, unlike most other
countries, has had a carbon tax specifically on coal fired power plants. And that's played a really
significant role in the phasing out of coal fired power in the UK. And we know, you know, we like to
tell ourselves that nowhere has carbon taxes, but in certain places and in certain sectors,
we have... And one of the things I think the UK has done really, really well on is its support
scheme for renewables and the carbon tax specifically on coal fired power plants. And that's played a
really significant role in phasing it out. I said, final question, I'm going to do it properly this
time. One thing you're optimistic about in 2025? So that's a good... That's always the most difficult
question for me. So we've been talking a lot about the UK. And I think that of all the parts of the
of the new UK government, the newish UK government, the most imp... the most, at least to my...
to the sort of... garbled... I would say that of all parts of that government, at least to my
impression, there is... the one... the one that is full of what seem like relatively competent people
and is... and is saying and doing some relatively ambitious things is Ed Miliband's department,
the energy department. And I think that their, you know, really ambitious plans to push towards
a clean energy sector by 2030 seem, at least on the limited reading I've done so far, to be competent,
well thought through, even potentially achievable. I think that's a positive thing for people in the UK,
at least to be positive about. And I think that that makes that part of the new UK government stand
out from the rest of the government. Whether they'll be able to see through on that, whether they'll get
the kind of latitude from the treasury to be able to, you know, utilize the resources they need to do,
that is a different question. But I think that they're at least showing some ambition and energy
and serious thinking in a way that is... distinguishes them from the rest of the UK government.
Brett Christophers, very good place to end on. A positive note for next year.
Thanks for joining us. Thanks for having me.
