There is a fundamental issue with roads and traffic that is being ignored at huge cost.
Environmentally, socially, and also economically.
Yes, this issue is costing us billions. It's because the basic principle that shapes our roads
and therefore our towns and cities and landscapes as well is dated and flawed. What on earth has been
going on that's meant that we have wasted billions, perhaps trillions globally on junk roads?
In this video, I'm going to explain, but I will warn you now though, once you start to peer down
this rabbit hole, once you see this, you will not be able to look at the world the same way again.
Why are freeways being widened when all the evidence points to that only making traffic worse?
Why does the USA effectively subsidize parking to the tune of $500 billion a year? What would happen
if we did things differently? To make sense of it all, I've been talking to some of the leading
minds in this field, industry veterans, academics, and politicians.
Traffic congestion is a major source of frustration. Drivers in the world's most congested cities can
lose up to 100 hours a year sat in traffic. I hate traffic. If that's not depressing enough,
there's apparently a huge economic cost to this as well. Estimates show that the UK might lose up to
7.5 billion pounds a year through traffic congestion. In China, $34 billion. In America, $80 billion per
year from traffic. What about the knock-on effects? CO2, NO2, noise, particulate emissions that are
responsible for thousands and thousands of premature deaths per year in the world's most congested cities.
So, what's the answer? Build more roads. Make traffic move freely. That makes sense, doesn't it?
Roads clearly need greater capacity. More roads, wider roads, and fewer interruptions, allowing more traffic
to flow at any one time. Problem solved, right? No. Wrong. In this video, I'm going to show you
evidence from around the world that demonstrates that the road-building frenzy we've been on for
the last 80 or so years has been exactly the wrong thing to do and why governments still seem to turn
a blind eye to it, wasting billions of dollars, pounds, or euros for no benefit and great cost. It's because
there are two fundamental issues going on at the same time. The first is that more roads actually lead
to more traffic. As much as we like to think we can, we cannot build our way out of solving congestion.
It sounds crazy, but it's true. It's called the fundamental law of road congestion. Have a guess
when it was discovered. 1962, an American economist called Anthony Downs realized that, and I quote,
when road capacity increases, traffic increases in proportion to the new capacity. When you build new
roads or add in an extra lane here or there, you get more traffic, not less. Essentially, as you improve
a road, you make it faster and easier to drive along it. Therefore, people will quite rationally choose
to use it more. They will choose to drive. The issue is that this increased desire to drive continues
until you have so many more cars on the road that you're back to square one. You have the same level
of congestion, only you have more cars and have spent a whole truckload of money. It's a process called
induced demand. It sounds weird, doesn't it? Because in the real world, it feels like the opposite is
happening. It feels like traffic is getting worse, and yet we're always one step behind being able
to beat congestion when, in actual fact, our interventions are making it worse. We are encouraging
people to drive when they otherwise might have taken a different mode of transport, or we're encouraging
them to drive instead of not taking that journey at all, or we're encouraging people to drive further
using that increased capacity. Now, as I said, this is not some hack science. This is something that
we have known about for over 70 years, and there are reams and reams of papers on the subject.
But the problem with induced demand is that it can't be quantified accurately, and it naturally leads
to a question that's quite hard to answer, whether some of those new cars on the road had previously been
put off from making the journey in the first place. Actually, is the new capacity simply satisfying
demand that already existed, a so-called latent demand? Therefore, that new capacity is actually
of benefit? To that, I would say, in densely populated countries and cities, there will always
be more potential road users than there is capacity. Latent demand would therefore always exist. Therefore,
if you keep making travel by car easier, faster, and cheaper than the alternatives,
more people will do it. More people will drive, which is therefore induced demand. That's exactly
what you see if you go back to the 1960s, when this concept was first spotted. Car use per capita was
much lower then than it is today, but because it was made so easy to drive, because it was prioritized above
all else we induced demand. It's no accident the car was seen as the ultimate way of getting around.
There were plenty of lobby groups pushing for it, but ultimately, the justification for it at a policy
level was that bigger, better, faster roads were going to make us richer. A new academic discipline was
born, transport economics. Stay with me, because here, things turn a little bit sinister.
The basis of transport economic theory is that the quickest way of getting from A to B
is the best, because it saves time, and time, as you know, is money.
Man is it ever economical. I see all my customers every week. All I spend for gas now is two bucks.
Right, Joe. The notion of the saving of travel time has been seen as the
largest single economic benefit from transport investment generally.
He would know. He was the former chief scientist at the UK Department of Transport.
Up to a point, this assertion is correct. You go to a country with a road network hamstrung by
geographic constraints like Nepal, half of which is the Himalayas, or Colombia, half of which is the
Andes, and you can see why. In both of those countries, I've experienced firsthand just how
hard it is to get around on the ground, leaving large parts of those countries isolated and
economically worse off, even though they were also absolute paradise. However, in reality,
what we've seen in more economically developed countries is that time has not been saved. Instead,
people have used that increase in speed to travel further. Time is not saved, distance traveled
increases. The fundamental principle of transport economics, the foundation and justification of
road building over the last 80 or so years is therefore not correct.
You might well now be thinking, that is a load of rubbish, but you can clearly see this in effect
when you look at data that shows how we travel. As David Metz explained, it is clear from countless
years of evidence that humans have a set travel time budget. Basically, we seem to be programmed to be
happy to travel for, on average, one hour per day. A hundred years ago, that meant that the amount of
distance a person could travel in a year was about 1,000 miles. As technology improved and new methods of
travel were invented, like railways and bicycles, so the amount of distance covered increased.
However, and this is the important bit, not the time. You can actually see this in UK
Department for Transport data over the last 50 years. The amount of journeys taken per person
has remained constant at about 1,000 per year. Instead of seeing the time spent traveling decreasing
because of faster roads and increased capacity, you can see that it has in actual fact remained constant
at about 370 hours per year. What's changed then is that the distance traveled has increased
dramatically. We have spent the same amount of time on the road, not being more productive,
not making more money, and not adding to the GDP. Whilst this might be UK data, it's true across the world.
The notion that we should estimate the benefit of transport investment based on time saving
is, in my view, not sound. The basic benefit are access benefits, which are different in kind
from time saving benefits. The transport economists have never managed to recognize this.
You can see that as the car became ever more popular, the distance traveled exploded.
But that undermines the founding principle of transport economics because no time was saved.
I mean, it changed our lifestyles, right? It changed how we live and where we live. We could live in
houses with more space, or we could live in rural areas and commute into cities. We could sprawl,
so we have. Now, you could argue that initially, at least, this ability to travel further also did allow
for economic development because businesses could reach new markets or jobs could be boosted in
areas that were otherwise cut off. What's interesting is that now,
even distance traveled has stopped increasing. In fact, it stopped at the turn of the century,
leading many experts to think that we had reached peak car. There was no advantage to traveling any
further. Roads had got as good as they needed to be. Am I right in thinking, then,
that up to about the turn of the century, there was some kind of benefit to improving the road network
because people were able to travel further in the same time, which you could imagine then,
as you said, would allow people to access, you know, more job opportunities or from a business
perspective, new markets. Then after that, if we reach plateau car, anything after that has been of
limited value? Yes, I would say so. The observable benefit, I think, is quite marginal.
It seems then that over the last 20 or 30 years, in spite of billions of dollars or pounds or euros
of investment, we haven't seen any benefit. Now, what seems crazy to me, bonkers in fact,
is why this hasn't yet filtered into policy. I'm sure you can think of examples where you live of
roads having their capacity increased. One look at England's National Highways Plan shows their
justification for it. Predictably, in the United States, the same is, of course, true. There, the
1.2 trillion dollar infrastructure bill from 2021. Of the funds allocated so far, more than half has
gone straight into highways. Half of that is in maintenance. The other half is highways expansion,
so more tarmac, more concrete, more cars. Why? People find it hard to give up because it implies that
they were wrong, you know, wrong beforehand. So that's the rather unsatisfactory situation in which
we find ourselves. It all seems pretty crazy, but it tallies up with what I heard from the former
Minister for Transport in Wales, Lee Waters, when I interviewed him last year. Well, it's not really
widely understood, I don't think, not even in transport circles. And that's what really fascinated me,
is what's driving this under the surface? And how do we get into the plumbing of the system?
Because a lot of these things we now take for granted. For example, how long does a pedestrian
have to cross a crossing point? You know, who makes that decision? How is that decided? And
what impact does that have? And once you start to get into that, you realise, again, that's quite
deliberate. So seeing to increase the amount of time a pedestrian has to cross the road, which in an
ageing society, you'd think, you know, we're going to need to think more about, is actually dictated by
economic formulas. So if you take longer to cross the road, you have traffic stopped for longer.
And that is seen by the Treasury and their Green Book formulas to harm the economy. Now,
I think that's crackers. But it's not as simple as saying we should change this. Because were you to
try and change it, these other forces, which you can't see and aren't even aware of, are pushing the
other way. And deeply embedded in the transport thinking is this idea that the role of the transport
profession is to allow cars to go faster and to go more directly, and for everything else really,
essentially didn't get out of the way. And that is not an accident. That is by design.
I checked in with another leading academic in this field as well, a professor of economic
geography at the London School of Economics, Steve Gibbons. Now, he said that while transport
economic models are increasingly complex, now building in induced demand, although arguably not
by as much as they should, as well as a million other elements, they still operate in the main on the
fundamental and seemingly false principle of time saving. For example, here in the UK,
the Lower Thames Crossing, which is a new tunnel and accompanying 12.9 miles of motorway to cross
the River Thames, has just been approved. Its cost will be approximately nine billion pounds. It's hoped
that it will relieve congestion on the motorway ring around London. The director of National Highway
said it would unlock growth with quicker, safer, and more reliable journeys. His agency said that even
though it will cost nine billion, it will add 45 billion to the UK's GDP. Now, is it going to work?
My guess is no. As we've heard, if you remove barriers from driving, people will do it more, driving
further and driving at more convenient times of day. What have you got for your nine billion pounds? More CO2,
more air pollution, more noise pollution, same traffic congestion. When you look, these kind of
infrastructure projects are everywhere and with those cost-benefit analyses to supposedly back them
up. In Houston, Texas, nine billion dollars has been allocated by the State Department for Transport
to widen the city's highways. Thousands of homes and businesses are being flattened to make way for more
lanes of traffic in spite of previous lessons in the same city. In 2008, work concluded on the 26-lane
Katy Highway. Journey times for most drivers got worse. A Texas Department of Transport spokesperson did
tell the Guardian newspaper that it was a false assertion that it had made things worse and that
actually population growth was to blame. Correct me if I'm wrong, if population growth is the main issue,
then surely prioritizing an efficient method of transport both from a space and resource perspective
over literally anything else is just sheer lunacy. We have 50 years of evidence of traffic congestion,
which we have so far failed to beat. So why are we doing the same thing again? There's an awful lot of embedded
knowledge and technique which people find it hard to give up.
What would happen, do you think, if we stop increasing capacity?
Well, nothing much. Would traffic get worse?
No, no. There's an equilibrium that gets set up. We haven't got a country-wide case of this in action
yet, but there are plenty of local examples where you get a sense of what might happen if we stopped.
And the best example of all is the Chonggechon stream in downtown Seoul, Korea.
At the turn of the century, the Chonggech district was one of the most congested,
polluted parts of the capital. At its heart was an elevated highway with eight lanes of traffic
carrying 168,000 cars per day. The area was choked with noise, pollution, and was rapidly in decline.
However, in 2003, the newly elected city mayor shut the road, demolished it,
and reinstated a water course that had flowed there 50 years previously.
Yep, a street. You can imagine the reaction. Where would 168,000 cars go? Surely, it would choke the city.
Seems like a valid question. The answer is no, it didn't. Research in the aftermath showed that people
simply changed their chosen mode of transport. Bus use increased, subway use increased. Meanwhile,
incredibly, traffic on surrounding roads did not increase. Now, was it because the Chonggech
district simply died? People stopped going there? Nope. The once dying area was now thriving. New
businesses opened. Tourists flocked there, perhaps in part due to improved air quality and reduced
air temperatures. So successful has it been, in fact, that city authorities have subsequently removed
another 15 elevated highways. This is an extreme example, and it's in an urban area, which of course
will have a different impact in comparison to a rural one, but it illustrates that removing road
capacity doesn't necessarily cause traffic chaos. In fact, there are plenty of other examples across
the world where road closures don't cause traffic chaos. In fact, not only do they not cause them,
but they actively reduce traffic problems on nearby roads as well. Even in the USA, there is already
precedence there too for removing elevated expressways, including this one in San Francisco, the Embarcadero.
Ultimately, it was an earthquake and not political will that caused its demise, but 34 years on,
few would ever imagine that a freeway had taken away two and a half miles of precious waterside real estate.
Lessons like this bring us back to an earlier point, which is to question whether or not roads and
cars have actually brought about the economic wealth that we assume they have, because what if there's
an alternative? In the case of that Embarcadero freeway, it didn't kill San Francisco. San Francisco
now has some of the highest land values in the United States. Is that land better used as a road or for
real estate? According to Google, generally in the city, it costs about $10 million per acre. A two and a
half mile section of freeway is roughly equivalent to 50 acres. To illustrate how much space roads take
up, here is a simple example taken from the excellent book, Movement by Talia Verkader. The
amount of land given over to the Valberg motorway junction is exactly the same as the size of the
village next door, which has 2,000 people living in it. Of course, I'm not suggesting that we strip out all
motorways and freeways, but it's not just roads that need to be taken into consideration. What about
the space taken up by cars when they're not being driven? In the USA, estimates that the proportion of
land use in cities given over to parking are about 25%. According to work by the late Donald Shoup, if you
add up all of the parking spaces in America, you get an area the size of Connecticut. By having so much
free parking, back in 2002 when he did the work, the USA is effectively subsidizing it to the tune of
between $128 and $374 billion per year. That is a lot of money in today's standards, but back in 2002,
I mean, imagine what could be unlocked if you didn't have to allocate so much space and money
to parking. My mind is blown.
Of course, people still do need to travel. What could an alternative look like? Essentially, we're
talking trains, buses, and active transport like cycling and walking. I was wondering whether or
not governments and authorities still place a value on these methods of transport. Yes, it turns out
that they do. In fact, the UK government published an excellent white paper nearly a decade ago called
The Value of Cycling. We should, I think, be as skeptical about this as we are about other cost-benefit
analysis when it comes to roads, but we needn't actually worry about the influence of this particular
report because in the government's own guidelines on how to value cycling infrastructure, there is no
mention of it at all. Fortunately, these guidelines are 980 pages shorter than the ones to value motor
vehicles. Even I was able to digest them. In them, there are lots of advantages listed, like how cycling
commuters are fitter and healthier, requiring fewer days off work and also less healthcare interventions
than people who commute by car, but there is no mention of directly assisting the economy. In fact,
the only mention at all I could find was something called a decongestion benefit, which is that enough
people cycle, it will reduce traffic and therefore speed up car drivers who can then save time and make
us more money. Yes, I am not joking. It's in there. Now, while I'm not fixated only on the economy,
it's important in this case for one particular reason, and that is that when it comes to government
policy, it would appear that unless you're driving, you do not have an economic value. Car drivers are
worth more than pedestrians and cyclists. It's easy to see why when it comes to active transport, it's not high
on a government's agenda. What we have is a situation which is very succinctly summed up by
Omar Raphael Bohr as, when roads are seen as something that promote the economy and make us richer,
and buses, bike lanes, and walkability are perceived as policies that are good for the environment,
then clearly roads are going to win most times. I think he's right, but that makes it all the more
frustrating. The basic principle of transport economics seems to be flawed. Roads seem to be
expensive. If we look at examples from other countries, we can see that active transport can be
good. In Freiburg in Germany, as an example, there the bicycle represents 19% of all journeys taken,
but yet it requires just 1% of the total investment to travel and transport infrastructure. The car,
meanwhile, has a 42% share of journeys, but requires 57% of the investment. Public transport
requires 42% of the investment for just 18% share. Now, this is something that I want to understand a
little bit more of, so I turn next to the capital of cycling, the Netherlands. I want to know whether or
not one of the most progressive countries in the world with an incredibly high use of cycling
infrastructure has got it all worked out. To find out, I spoke to Marco Tabromelstroet,
a professor of urban mobility futures. What he had to say, I must admit, really shocked me.
Marco Tabromelstroet, If you come to the Netherlands,
what you will find is the best version of the wrong system. What we have done, and especially under
pressure, it wasn't always like this. The Netherlands was actually following the lead of countries like the UK.
The Buchanan Report, we invited American engineers, traffic engineers in the 50s and 60s to build our
cities more like the cities that are like London or New York, but actually under huge resistance from
the population that shifted in the 70s. So everything you see now is a result of that.
And since then, we have been working diligently on creating conditions for people to make more,
to offer them more choice, I would even say. Because at the same time, we also became quite rich. We were
suddenly a liquid gas exporter. And because we were very rich and we had this idea of sustainable mobility,
what we actually built in the Netherlands is a system where you can have it all. So you can very easily
cycle everywhere if you want to. Public transport is of high quality, but also the car infrastructure
system is probably the best in the world. Is that because, like the constant drive to build new roads
and improve existing ones, is that because the cycling infrastructure isn't enough to allow the
Netherlands to be economically successful and to continue to thrive? Well, that's a big question.
I would, let's first start with answering that. I think the bicycle will never replace the mobility
options that the car gives fully. And you can see, you can build the same argument around trains, right?
So bikes can never cover easily larger distances and trains can never offer the door-to-door connectivity
that cars offer. So cars are this ideal typical way and we organize our entire society, also in the
Netherlands around that concept. But if you combine the bike with the train and that's actually the
hidden gem of the Netherlands, where about 600,000 people daily commute by combining the bicycle and
the train, then you have a fully fledged alternative that actually supports almost any urban conglomeration,
in any form and also supports economic viability. But maybe going back why the Netherlands has such an exemplary car
infrastructure as well. I think it has to do with that point of getting on the table in the 70s, fighting for
alternative choices for people, building the bike paths. Because I would say that we don't have 32,000 kilometers of separate bike paths.
We also have 32,000 kilometers of separated car infrastructure because of that, right? So we created
a system and again, we had quite some money to spend on that. You can, you can see the Netherlands and you
can, everywhere you see fancy and expensive bridges and tunnels that are very expensive solutions to get
cyclists and car drivers out of each other's way. And for cyclists, that's of course great because
it's, it's, it's much safer to not engage with drivers, but that also created at the same time a system
where car driving became very convenient as well. Many countries can replicate what we've done,
but there's a huge cost. And the cost is that we are not solving the problem at its core.
We are still creating systems that are ignoring the elephant in the room, that are still built around
a car dominated urban development patterns. And even, and we can get to that maybe as well,
similar levels of motor normativity as in the UK. Am I right in thinking though, that in order to reverse
this like car centric society that we have, it would need wholesale change in, in virtually every
aspect of life, right? In terms of where a lot of people live would be very inconvenient suddenly,
because a lot of people live in developments where you need a car. We would need to see new shops
opening, we would see the reversal of supermarkets, we would, you know, like people's, people's work
would change. Is that, is that feasible? Well, again, that all changed in the last 70 years,
right? So in 1950s, the average distance that a Dutch person would spend per day traveling was around
seven kilometers per day. So that's two generations ago, right? So my, my father actually grew up in a
world where there were no, almost no cars. And that was the average distance. And indeed, you're right,
the entire society was organized, organized around that potential for mobility. And we completely
overturned that and created the system that is, that has a certain element of lock-in, or as Ivan Illich
would call a radical monopoly. It creates, so basically the car creates distances that only
the car can cover. And our entire system is built around that. But again, it's, it's 50 years, right?
In the history of our cities, it's a blip, but we have changed. So currently an average Dutch person
spends 42 kilometers per day traveling and mostly because they have to, right? It's not, it's not a
choice. You have to, to cover these distances for work, for leisure and, and for your supermarket. So
reflecting back on that, I don't think that car dependency or cars are the problem. They are a symbol
of an underlying problem. And I think it's much more important to realize that the mobility dependence
and the traffic engineering mindsets that we have institutionalized, they create that problem,
right? Within the language of traffic engineering, we are all homo economicus. We are all egoistic
and isolated individuals optimizing our own utility. As a result, obviously we start believing that. And
as a result, we want to have a car because the car is then the ideal solution. It's, it offers us this,
this potential. So we need to get away from cars are bad and bikes are good, I think. And towards
traffic engineering has a problematic limited view on society and that's what we need to tackle.
Now, let it be said, I am not anti-car. I own a car and I realized that our car has allowed me and my
family to live life in a way that we couldn't do without. In fact, when I think about it,
cars have given me incredible opportunities. Ironically enough, I don't think I could have
become a professional cyclist without one. However, times are changing. As leading transport planner,
Chris Carter told me, if we properly measured the negative externalities of car usage, then we would
have a dramatically different perspective on our own transport choices. Basically, if we realized the true
cost of cars, we probably wouldn't use them anywhere near as much. Perhaps if we properly measured and
talked about the benefits afforded from other modes of transport, we might also place a different value
on them as well. In fact, what I think is needed is a transport planning system that places a true value
on all modes of transport, whether that's positive or negative. Perhaps then that could then end up
being reflected by policymakers and maybe then our world might start to look a little bit different,
maybe a little bit better.
