there's something rotten in the state of autism tick tock rotten to the core
let's talk about aspie supremacy
not autistic you're probably just a star state people that are higher vibrational souls people
that are conscious beings not npcs not organic portals that actually have souls and personalities
you have good genes you know that right you have good genes
aspie supremacy isn't new not by a long shot when we first got the internet autistic people were
thrilled couldn't be happier let me tell you you know when young people now look back on the early
internet to try and like get a taste for what society and culture was like back then what they're
actually getting is a peek into the lives of the geeky neurodivergent kids the cool kids weren't
online till facebook they were outside with friends the early internet seemed weird and inaccessible to
most people and that was because it was weird and inaccessible to most people computers and
internet connections were expensive and the whole time you had people on the telly going on about
how it's all just a fad and won't catch on anyway you had to really be able to see the potential in it
and geeky neurodivergent people who faced barrier after barrier in the outside world immediately did
they saw the opportunity of freedom that it offered and they jumped at it autistic people shaped and
literally built so much of the internet that we still know today there was no such thing as an
autistic community before the internet but forums message boards and chat rooms would be the foundation
of what would become a thriving and increasingly organized community i was too young to be on forums
back then and i didn't even know i was autistic so i wouldn't have found them anyway i spent my online
time getting hit on by people on msn messenger i couldn't find an actual historical record of the
first use of the term aspie supremacy but i did find a post by somebody who says that they think they
might have invented the term autistic supremacy in 1999 in response to aspie supremacy discourse so i
think it's safe to say that it was a thing by then the concept gained in popularity and became a
frequent topic on autism forums by the mid-2000s but then what is the difference between aspie supremacy
and autistic supremacy so aspie supremacy originally referred to the idea that people who were diagnosed
with asperger's syndrome that they were different from and better than people who had been diagnosed
as autistic this was before the diagnostic criteria changed see we now diagnose people with autism spectrum
disorder and then this is further classified by care needs all diagnosed autistic people have care needs
because you don't get diagnosed unless you do the diagnostic criteria were changed because there is
no hard line to be drawn between different autistic people people with asd1 are autistic and people with
asd3 are autistic the only line that we can draw is how much support an individual needs and individual
needs fluctuate over the course of a person's lifetime so even that line needs to be flexible the
distinction between asperger's and autism was flawed flawed right from the very beginning
the distinction came about thanks to hans asperger an austrian pediatrician who was an enthusiastic
participant of the child euthanasia program of nazi germany there has been some debate as to asperger's
involvement in the program over the years we have unearthed his own writings and correspondence that
show that he was a proud and vocal supporter of eugenics it's also been discovered that often asperger
was far more severe than his own colleagues when it came to his judgment of the disabled children in his
care and those children who he deemed too disabled were sent to die at the infamous am spiegelgrund clinic
in vienna it's clear from asperger's own words that he saw it as his duty to classify children for
the betterment of the human race different types of child were worthy of different types of life he noted
however that some people who would have fallen under his category of autistic psychopathy went on to do
important work in academia and the arts and so he created the distinction of asperger's syndrome
some paint this move as a brave pediatrician who found a way to save some of the children in his care
but it's now clear that this was no display of compassion but a furthering of the idea that all people
can be categorized onto a hierarchy with those at the bottom simply unworthy of life in the early
20th century there were a great number of jewish academics and scientists seen as leaders of their
fields when the nazis rose to power those who could fled the country this created a gap in the scientific
abilities of the nazi regime exacerbated by the fact that they dismissed all the achievements of jewish
physicists including and especially einstein as jewish science by the 40s the regime was in desperate
need of so-called deutsche scientists they were losing a war the threat of nuclear arms was looming
and there was a scramble to keep up with the advances of so-called jewish science you know aka
actual science the idea that there is a special kind of person who has a condition which might make
them especially good at science especially apt at doing some of the things that a government at war might
need to get done code breaking computation statistical analysis physics people who were already
institutionalized and therefore practically captive i can only imagine this came as good news to the
regime asperger designated autistic people into those who could be exploited and those who could not
there is no pride to be found in that distinction so if aspie supremacy is all to do with the
distinction between autism and asperger's syndrome then what is autistic supremacy well according to
the person who thinks they might have invented the term i was referring to autistic people who went beyond
just thinking we were just as valuable as anyone and went into the mode of thinking they were superior
when i say superior i don't mean being better at specific skills which on average we are in some areas
but better people more valuable as a whole some went even further than mere superiority and said the
most insulting and terrible things about non-autistic people not as satire but for real and some went
even further than that and wanted non-autistic people either dead or evolved out of existence
and that is what i want to talk about most of the time these days autism supremacy and aspie supremacy are
used somewhat interchangeably and also these days it can take many different forms from the fetishization
of giftedness and those of you who have your iqs in your bio to the idea that autism is the next step in
human evolution to even wackier ideas like what if we were aliens beings made of pure spirit sent down from
the heavens to better humanity join me as i do my very best to highlight these different forms of
autistic supremacy and uncover the dark history behind them this video was months in the making
the best part of a year and i have no idea if youtube is going to push this topic or not
there's a lot of darkness ahead i am struggling at the minute to keep this channel afloat and so i would
greatly appreciate your engagement and if possible your patronage if you are autistic you are an
energy worker okay i'm gonna break it to you now you just you are one not autistic you're probably just
a star seed you're not autistic stop those diagnosing yourself with autism you're probably just a star
seed i've seen a huge link between neurodivergency and star seeds or rather souls that are not from
earth that have had a history in the cosmos somewhere if you are autistic you chose to enter this life
with more of your soul embodied from the information that i've gathered um i believe that the kids who are
on the autism spectrum are actually rainbows and sometimes crystal children but regardless of whatever
wave they're in they're absolutely higher dimensional souls they come into this world with very special
and very specific gifts talents abilities these are not only a gift for them but a gift for humanity
rainbow children are the gift for the new earth they are the ones who set the stage their genetics
are even different take the characteristics of both the indigo and the crystal that's what the rainbow
child is made out of they are the most naturally connected to the spiritual realm
they're extremely advanced souls if you are autistic you have spiritual gifts you are spiritually advanced
that is why you appear to be autistic your nervous system is heightened due to
what kind of soul you are and what you're here to do autistic people are the most natural purified
form of humanity and neurotypical pool are an offshoot of capitalism and colonialism so when it comes
to being non-verbal or not speaking uh as an autistic trait when you exist at a higher frequency
you you vibrate faster and that can mean that you exist slightly in the future um and we are like the ax
not okay and the powers that be have wanted to categorize these people as crazy disabled add whatever
just so they could medicate you to suppress your gifts you're not autistic you're a higher vibrational
soul incarnated into this body but you are an individuated aspect of source a fractal of some
type of higher consciousness sometimes these people are actually archangels incarnated
you are a superhero who are not disabled you are hyper-advantaged and they want to make these
people believe that there's something wrong with them when they're really the best of them
and you usually probably have a higher iq than the rest of them
come sit can i interest you in some mystical novelties i could read your tarot if you like or
photograph your aura no cold read i mean um spiritual medium services i've got crystals
i made a video years ago about indigo children and autism i love that video i think in part because
it was so personal it starts off with an interview with an indigo child where i completely honestly
give accounts of multiple times that i seem to exhibit psychic powers honestly i think i make as
good a case as any of the star seed indigo children that i've seen online and without lying my own
mother used to think that i was psychic in some way i'm not because no one is indigo children rainbow and
crystal children star seeds pleiadians so i've been saying for years that i think i'm a star seed
more like knowing i am and that i originally came from the star electra in the pleiadian system
most people think i'm crazy well i also found out recently that i'm autistic and apparently there is
a whole book about autism and pleiadians i have yet to read it and unfortunately can't find it anywhere
available online some of the children that you the humans call autistic are in fact pleiadians who have
come to earth of their own free will for the purpose of helping the planet in its transition
to its next stage of evolution we develop the autistic mechanism to enable our pleiadian essence to arrive
and settle on earth in human bodies without losing our pleiadian consciousness the idea is that those who
would normally be diagnosed with some kind of neurodivergency that in fact they are actually
a different kind of person with a different kind of soul sent from the stars to help humanity
towards a brighter future sometimes they're talked of as if they're literal aliens other times it's talked of
as if it's a mutation that happens every few decades or so sometimes it's more about what kind of soul
you have and other times other times they're spoken of like gods pleiadians are gods they're not
aliens so the pleiadians came during this first world and they helped they worked with
the hopi gods you know like the people learned songs and they stood up and they started to dance
and there was an evolutionary process of the hopi people that something dramatic happened during the
third world the third world ended when the comets hit the earth i've spoken a lot about the origins of
various new age beliefs in the past because kind of a special interest of mine
because i used to love all of that as a kid i would eat up anything to do with the paranormal
anything all i wanted for my birthdays and christmases at one point was books on the paranormal i did a
school project when i was like nine or ten about the paranormal out from ghosts to crop circles to the
bermuda triangle anything later i got more into like witchcraft and learning about old european
religious practices and mythologies and later still in my 20s i rather regrettably became immersed in
backpacking hippie culture in southeast asia it was during that time that i became introduced to the idea
that there is ancient knowledge about very important things which has either been forgotten or actively
hidden from us i met my first conspiracy theories i got a copy of zeitgeist the movie on a usb stick from
some guy in a hostel in malaysia and i watched it in my room on my ancient second hand laptop and then
when i did move somewhere with a tv we didn't get many english speaking channels but we did get
the history channel so esotericism a category encompassing a diverse range of religious traditions
that are typically included together because of their shared cultural marginality or their focus on
imparting teachings to a select group the concept emerged largely in the 19th century western europe
as a means of categorizing various traditions with a much longer history in european society
including hermitism kabbalah uh-huh ceremonial magic alchemy and astrology rosicrucianism
anyway although it has since also come to encompass more modern traditions such as spiritualism theosophy
wicca and the new age milieu confusingly there is no universally agreed definition of esotericism
but the thing it all kind of loosely shares in common is this idea of secret knowledge which
currently only a few people have access to but you could also have access to it if you follow me
or if you read that book or if you listen to that guru or attend my course you listen to my podcast
pay for my services
join my cult i mean group
now esoteric and new age ideas are very broad and they vary depending on who you're talking to at the
time but there are some underlying themes which are hard to ignore i've spoken before about the
christian roots of the law of attraction and how it's basically just prayer rework though it was popularized
by the elite because it on one hand bolstered the idea that they deserve to be where they are
and on the other put the onus on individuals to better their lives through the power of manifestation
basically you are where you are because you deserve it because you've chosen to be there
a lot of new age thought has its roots in christian reconceptions it has its roots in the work of franz
mesmer an early german physicist who proposed an energy transference between living things and new
thought a religious movement which rose in the usa in the early 19th century from wikipedia the new
thought movement was based on the teachings of phineas quimby an american mesmerist and healer quimby
had developed a belief system that included the tenant that illness originated in the mind as a
consequence of erroneous beliefs and that a mind open to god's wisdom could overcome any illness
and then you've got people like guido von list jurg lans and helena bloody blavatsky
the aliens have been involved in earth's ancient civilizations assisting with the development of
human culture and spirituality pleiadians are humanoid in appearance resembling humans in many ways
they're often much taller fair skinned with light colored eyes i've come to see them as the elven race
of the cosmos the links between the nazis and occult mysticism can't be understated although they can
very well be overstated the history channel it's not really known to what extent hitler himself
believed in this stuff but my money is on definitely a bit but what is known is that others in those halls of
nazi power such as heinrich himmler leader of the ss and main architect of the holocaust definitely did
and hitler absolutely leaned into exploiting the popularity of this stuff among the german population
but especially among the german upper classes it is well known that hitler criticized occultists
freemasons and astrologers and even persecuted some of them when he came into power and yet in his
nightly monologues to his assembled guests hitler revealed his belief in the very ideas that these
groups were perpetrating ample evidence of this is provided in his references to reincarnation the
lost continent of atlantis and hans horbiger's world ice theory as well as in his conviction that
the early myths and legends of cosmic disasters and struggles between giants and gods are actually
mankind's vague memory of a disaster that destroyed a humanity occultism mysticism and esotericism were
enthralling europe's upper classes long before hitler was born a fascination with the east especially
tibet captured the imaginations of those europeans who were afraid of losing their privilege and power
due to the encroachment of democracy and industrialization so many of our concepts ideas and
structures have their origins in just rich europeans being afraid of democracy change my mind orientalist
tales of the far east were full of talk of gurus with ancient knowledge and a promise of a return to a
more ordered time a more natural time a way to get back to our essential human nature which of course
included a natural hierarchy of all things at the same time you had upper and middle class people
abandoning the cities which were once nice and classy places full of statues and culture and art and
things like that but which were now full of factories and chimneys and workhouses and of course all the
working poor that goes along with it and so they began fleeing to the countryside a very cottage
core-esque movement flourished among europeans elite in germany and austria this longing for a return
to a rural volkish life became known as lebensreform so there's a lot going on in europe around this time
it's kind of hard to weave it into a narrative so just like all of this is happening from like the mid
1800s to the end of world war ii in 1945. hitler was born in 1889 just so you have a time frame so
you've got the industrial revolution making the rich folk scared making them reconsider city life
you've got science flourishing the theory of evolution proving some bible stuff wrong leading
to wealthy christians to go searching for answers to the contradictions to reconsider how religion is
viewed it's a time when like just normal rich people could go traveling for the first time like
just for travel's sake like they didn't have to be a merchant or a colonizer or something first more
people are able to write and print books mass media that wasn't just the church was a thing for the
first time like it's a lot there's a lot happening revolutions even and in germany and austria
specifically there began a movement for german nationalism before world war one which had its
roots firmly in the mystic occult teachings of people like helena blavatsky guida von list and jurg lands
helena blavatsky was a russian aristocrat who went backpacking in tibet and then became one of the
most influential thinkers of the 20th century but like in a bad way she's known as the founder of theosophy
and was obsessed with plato and ancient hindu and buddhist ideas from wikipedia as presented by
blavatsky theosophy teaches that there is an ancient and secretive brotherhood of spiritual adepts
known as the masters who although found around the world are centered in tibet these masters are alleged
by blavatsky to have cultivated great wisdom and supernatural powers they believe that these
masters are attempting to revive knowledge of an ancient religion once found around the world and
which will again come to eclipse the existing world religions in her book the secret doctrine
helena blavatsky lays out her ideas about evolution she believed that there are seven root races the
first of which were created purely from spirit the second were the hyperboreans who came from the north
pole and who were also made purely from spirit then there came the third who lived on the lost continent of
lemuria which is a mythical lost continent which was proposed to link africa the middle east
and the indian subcontinent so called because lemurs apparently anyway plate tectonics debunked that
idea pretty swiftly but it still pops up on the history channel from time to time and so then according to
blavatsky in the fourth round of earth higher beings came down to earth and that's when people actually
became people and those people the fourth root race lived on the continent of atlantis and the atlanteans
gave way to the fifth root race the arian race blavatsky would publish work in which she upholds the
arian race as the hope for humanity the swastika was already an extremely popular symbol throughout
europe and the world really it was everywhere and it always symbolized good things change new beginnings
the theosophy society used it a lot but so did lots of other kinds of society but blavatsky decided that
the swastika was one of the most powerful symbols going and that it should be the symbol of the fifth root
race the aryan race blavatsky didn't actually encourage domination of races over other races
but she certainly paved the way for those who would guido von list born guido carl anton list in 1848
was an austrian occultist and writer who supported an anti-christian return to the old gods
particularly wotan commonly known as odin
that's just jeremy corbyn in 1902 he became under the influence of blavatsky's theosophy
and he incorporated it into his own beliefs his ideas became incredibly popular among german-speaking
elites and the list society was formed in 1908 list believed that modern society was degenerate but that
all the muck would be cleansed away by some kind of apocalyptic event og preppers so list got into
all that theosophy stuff during a time when he was temporarily blind and also during that time he
claimed to have visions of ancient runes these runes what he just made up became a huge hit although we do
now brightly call them pseudo runes anyway himmler adopted these runes for ss symbolism uniforms and
flags and until 1939 when world war ii broke out and they had more pressing concerns some branches of
the ss were trained in ancient runic symbolism you know what the ss were right they started off as hitler's
bodyguards elite troops there to protect the leaders of this new nazi movement but under the
direction of himmler they would become the starting block for the next stage of human evolution
sound familiar people sometimes think that nazis thought that they were the aryan super race but
that's not true they believed that the aryan super race had effectively been wiped out due to
interbreeding that it was a people who did exist but don't anymore but that their genes still exist
and that they could be bred back into existence see true aryans the og aryans they weren't just blonde
haired blue-eyed able-bodied and fertile they were psychic psychic again we don't know how much hitler
himself believed in all of this but there is evidence that several very influential nazi figures
fully believed that they were descendants from higher beings with psychic powers some of whom
even claimed to have a psychic connection with the spirit of the aryan race how do i connect with the
pleiadians this is an excellent question i'll try to go as deep as i can and give you some tangible tools
the first thing to recognize is that the pleiadians are beings of light that operate on a frequency
of love and harmony from a zero point perspective with me as i channel the pleiades and see how this resonates
as we zoom into the pleiades the planet is full with pastel colors blue and pink and the vibration is very high
high almost like children singing or dolphin making noises greetings chosen ones i am coming on with a
message from the pleiadian collective to discuss with you um your soul contract prior to coming to earth
in relation to your family she's saying even the reptilians are evolutionary souls and we see many of
them incarnating now on earth and other places but one of their main rules for them to play here in the
universe was contrast and she's talking about how earth is somewhat of a metaphor of what has
happened in the galaxy and in this universe at times where the dark forces are going up against the
lighter forces and creating this kind of contrast going up against each other this is the pleiadian
the pleiadian love and connection they're telling me
they're saying thank you very much for reaching out and to channeling this loving vibration to you all as
they're collecting which is so beautiful we love we love we love we come so much peace and love
jesus was actually a pleiadian spiritual master by the name of jimmanuel in the pleiadian star system
he was known as jimmanuel he was a solar king our higher dimensional brothers and sisters are very
aware that our monkey brain our logical mind prevents us from fully breaking through the barriers into
the cosmic realm right and so one way that they are reaching certain individuals right now is through
dreams lost an hour in deep meditation and came out with this i've never done this before does anyone
know about light code greetings cherished beings of earth i am mira from the pleiadian high council
you stand at the threshold of a cosmic gateway moving towards the higher dimensions and shedding the
dense energies that have long obscured your true essence as multi-dimensional galactic beings
this is a pleiadian light language activation breathe and open to the light activating
light codes within your dna activating consciousness higher consciousness
this is just for more loving and connection hello there and welcome to this palladian contact meditation
i am here to assist you in connecting to your palladian light source
for some of you this will be an innate starseed connection that you have i felt the pleiadians
come to me today meditation i recently remembered that i'm a pleiadian starseed and i want to describe
what the energies felt like and see if anyone resonates it felt like calming purples or blues
like pure bliss and joy like white light very feminine energy goddess energy very healing energy nurturing
mothering kind very demure very mindful hey everyone welcome back to my channel today we're going to talk
to the palladian galactic council and they're going to give us information on how to move energy from our
celestial chakras to our planetary chakra this is a message from the pleiadians and the galactic
federation council we'd like you all to know about the 144 so the 144 are a group of souls who have been
selected and chosen on planet earth they do come from different star systems none of them are earth
souls they are all star souls they come from different star systems and different planets but
the 144 are basically people who are in the spotlight people who have more say and more power so think
about it on planet earth how we have celebrities right so actors musicians some of them are part of
the 144 they do want you to know that one of the actors keanu reeves he is part of the 144.
444 this is the pleiadian
This is the Palladian
The Palladian
We in the High Council send you emanations of love and gratitude.
Hitler's writings show that in his mind, all races have souls, and all souls have a race.
And there is evidence that he at least a little bit believed in all this psychic stuff.
The original spirituality of man can be seen, according to Blavatsky, in the fact that mankind once was endowed with psychic powers, which she attributed to the so-called Cyclopean Eye.
Blavatsky felt that as man evolved materially and intellectually, this third eye atrophied to what is now the pineal gland, and man mostly lost his psychic powers.
But, stated Blavatsky, mankind is destined to regain these abilities.
That Hitler was well versed in these racial peculiarities is demonstrated in one of Hermann Rauschning's conversations with Hitler.
To have magic insight was apparently Hitler's idea of the goal of human progress.
He himself felt that he already had the rudiments of this gift.
He attributed to it his success and his future eminence.
Speculations of this sort fascinated Hitler, and he would sometimes be entirely wrapped up in them.
He saw his own remarkable career as a confirmation of hidden powers.
He saw himself as chosen for superhuman tasks.
As the prophet of the rebirth of man in a new form.
So, while white supremacy was pretty ubiquitous across Europe and North America, the idea that there were supernatural qualities at stake.
This spread directly from those early backpacking occultists, and was used to gain support for even the most violent of methods.
According to Wikipedia, by the end of World War I, there were about 75 Volkish groups in Germany. Promoting a variety of pseudo-historical, mystical, racial, and anti-semitic views.
This had major influence on the embryonic Nazi party.
Hitler wrote in Mein Kampf,
The basic ideas of the National Socialist movement are Volkish.
And the Volkish ideas are National Socialist.
But a student of Guido von List would take these Volkish ideas a step further.
Jörg Lanz von Liebenfels, born Adolf Josef Lanz.
Oh, and by the way, the reason why these guys keep adding von something to their names is just to make them sound aristocratic.
Because the upper classes were the initial target audience for this stuff.
Because this stuff is inherently hierarchical.
So, old Jörg was another Austrian occultist, a former monk, and a virulently anti-semitic writer, who had found a magazine called Ostara.
Ostara was a German nationalist magazine, which described itself as the only and first racial science newspaper.
Lanz wrote almost all of the articles himself, and it was widely available throughout Austria.
It was cheap to buy, and it could be found in cafes and coffee houses.
It is known that Hitler read Ostara.
And Lanz himself claimed that a young Hitler had visited him in Austria to try and find back copies for his collection.
And it has also been said that copies of Ostara were among Hitler's possessions later in life.
Hitler had fought in World War I, and Ostara and other such German nationalist, occultist publications were hot shit among the troops in the trenches.
It's easy to see why. They were full of tales of the destiny of the Germanic people to hold dominion over others.
A number of these early occultists fully believed that World War I was a sign of this destiny manifesting.
That not only would Germany prevail, but it would take its rightful place as a world leader.
Obviously that didn't happen.
Germany lost the war, and faced harsh penalties.
A huge loss of power, and financial ruin.
Anti-German sentiment was perceived everywhere.
It seemed to many as if outside forces were trying to destroy everything they held dear.
And so when, later, groups vowed to fulfil these occultist promises of glory, people didn't need that much convincing.
Jurg Lanz had also developed a theory based in part on Blavatsky's Theosophy, which he called Theozoology.
According to the German Wikipedia page on Lanz, he formulated a theological doctrine according to which,
The fall of man consisted in the originally divine Aryans intermarrying with animals.
This resulted in inferior races that threatened the legitimate dominance of the Aryans, especially in Germany,
where the Aryans were still the most numerous in international comparison.
It says that the Theosophical society as a whole was internationalist and liberal in its orientation.
Lanz was the first to absolutise Blavatsky's ideas of the human races into racial biologism.
Lanz soon founded himself his own secret society, called the New Templar Order, or Ordo Novi Templi.
Ant.
Fuckin' nerd.
Which was an anti-semitic, anti-feminist, anti-socialist circle-jerk of weirdos.
They even bought the ruins of a castle to be their HQ.
And in 1907, Lanz hoisted above his castle a flag which bore the same symbol he had previously used to adorn the front pages of his magazine, Ostara.
The swastika.
Lanz is sometimes called the man who gave Hitler his ideas, but this, this is contested.
They didn't seem to much like each other in later life, and Lanz's little Templar club got banned along with every other minority religion when the Nazis took power.
Hitler did often speak critically about mystics and occultists such as Lanz.
But what's not clear to me is if this came from a place of skepticism of their ideas, or just wanting to control information.
Just securing power and influence away from would-be gurus.
Hitler was probably also aware enough to recognise that some of Lanz's ideas might not have vibed well with the populist message that the Nazis needed to portray at least early on.
They initially needed the support of the working class and women.
And Lanz was violently opposed to both.
It's bad PR.
But Lanz himself remained adamant that his work had been a primary influence on Nazi ideology.
Writing in Ostara, one shall remember that the swastika and fascist movements are basically offspring of Ostara.
And he continued to claim that, long after the Nazis fell, until his death, in 1954.
And when you look at some of the things that Lanz was writing in publications that Hitler definitely read, you can start to see why.
He wrote that now was the time for Germany to rise up and establish a world empire, and to restore the original divinity of the Aryans.
But while it is debated how much influence Lanz had on Hitler, what is generally agreed upon is that he was one voice out of many espousing very similar ideas.
He was capturing the mood of the time, not creating it.
The idea of racial destiny.
A destiny which had been stifled in the aftermath of World War One.
Even if there was debate and arguments over the specifics, this was one of the things which swept the Nazis to power.
Not long after Lanz had set up his little secret society, another was formed.
In Munich, the Thule Society was originally intended to be a study group on German antiquity, which focused on discussing the origins of the Aryan race.
And over time, began producing anti-Semitic propaganda, in which they proposed that Jews were the mortal enemies of the Aryan race.
And which elaborated on a supposed Jewish conspiracy, which had to be fought at all costs.
The aim of the Thule Society was to establish a dictatorship and expel all the Jewish people from Germany.
Members of the Thule Society included Rudolf Hess, who would become deputy Führer to Hitler.
Alfred Rosenberg, who would go on to head the Nazi Office for Foreign Affairs, as well as the Department for Surveillance and Cultural Policy.
Hans Frank, who became the head of the General Government in Nazi-occupied Poland.
Gottfried Feder, who became an economic theoretician for the Nazi government.
And Heinrich Himmler, who would head the SS.
And Hitler himself was taught how to do public speaking by two Thule Society members, one of whom claimed to be a psychic medium.
The society was keen to help stop the rise of the left.
And eventually became involved in paramilitary efforts against leftist organising.
Helping to violently stamp out uprisings in Munich.
Members of the Thule Society established links with other far-right groups.
And in 1919, they formed a political party.
The Deutsche Arbeiterpartei.
DAP.
German Workers' Party.
And in that same year, Adolf Hitler joined the party.
First in the role as a spy, but he quickly learned to quite like it there.
By 1920, the party was calling itself the National Socialist German Workers' Party.
AKA, the Nazi Party.
I'm not saying that any one individual or group made the Nazis happen.
I'm trying to illustrate how acceptance of esoteric, occultist ideas of destiny.
Ideas of forgotten history, of lost powers and affinity with blood and soil.
Ideas dismissing the advances of the modern world as degenerate.
And a longing to return to some kind of mythical origin.
These ideas had been accepted long before Hitler came to rule.
The Nazis were not uniquely evil madmen who brainwashed a whole nation and created the environment in which a genocide could happen.
That environment already existed.
And occultists, such as Blavatsky, Liszt and Lanz, they laid the foundations for it to flourish.
And even if Hitler himself didn't believe this stuff, he certainly put people into positions of extraordinary power who definitely did.
And he knew that full well.
Do you know that the Nazi government also had a department which was basically designed to just go around the world and find antiquities and say that they're probably Aryan.
Aryans probably did that, did that pyramid or whatever.
They were the first ones to do that whole mainstream archaeologists are lying to you, ancient alien thing.
Like, oh no, the brown people who live here, they couldn't have possibly done all that.
No, no, it must have been a higher being, a higher kind of being that we happen to be descendants of.
So technically, if you think about it, this is ours.
But they wielded new age thought so successfully.
Because it already supported their ideas.
It's inherently supremacist.
They didn't make it that way.
And modern new age ideas are barely any different.
And when we add in all these concepts of starseeds and Pleiadians, higher planes of consciousness, it's just a rehashing of the exact same stuff that Himmler was boring his dinner guests with back in the twenties and thirties.
Like all that Atlantis stuff.
The lost city of Atlantis, as I'm sure you're aware, is a fictional city made up by Plato when he was writing his allegories of the hubris of nations.
It wasn't until an awful lot later that European colonisers and explorers began speculating that maybe all this Atlantis stuff was real after all.
That maybe old Plato was talking about this new world what we've just discovered.
And then, of course, Blavatsky happened.
In 1930, Alfred Rosenberg, a Nazi theorist and prominent part of the Nazi government, who was eventually executed for crimes against humanity, published The Myth of the 20th Century.
In 1937, Hitler awarded it the State Prize for Art and Science.
And by 1944, it had sold over one million copies in Germany.
In it, he claims that the Aryans originated in the lost city of Atlantis.
And because they were so advanced and noble that this justified enslaving and even murdering any non-Aryan people.
So, anyway, I found this on a website called Aspergia.
Aspergia is a website that is often cited as being critical to early Aspie supremacy.
It's an origin myth for Aspies.
It's basically the story of Atlantis, but autistic.
Atlantis.
But no, they went with Aspergia.
You know what? It just occurred to me that it might be pronounced Aspergia.
Like Aspergers.
Jesus Christ.
And the Aspergians existed for centuries on their super cool and advanced little island which was in the middle of the sea.
They were largely isolated except for the occasional visitor from beyond the sea.
Until one day, for some reason, the seas began to rise and so they had to make boats and leave their home forever.
They went out into the world and assimilated with other civilizations until all memory of them was lost.
Their descendants, however, would still bear their genetics, their special abilities, their gifts.
And one day, they would remember their history.
Today is that day.
Powerful stuff.
A forgotten civilization.
We call this land Aspergia.
We pronounce it so because no one knows what its real name was or the tongue spoken by its people.
Aspergia.
A land surrounded by oceans as far as the eye can see.
A land of sea-gazing people.
Aspergians.
Who venture into the great waters for fishing, but never the great distances required to find others.
They taught their young that each and every person is born with a very specific talent.
Their special gift, which they must identify if they are to live a full and fulfilling life.
Oh yeah, yeah. Like the X-Men. Got it.
There were ancient stories told of encounters with other peoples from beyond the sea.
They were described as looking similar to the Aspergians, but having different customs.
And producing very loud sounds, which were painful to the ears of the Aspergians.
There's goddamn Eurotypical!
I fully understand the impulse to love the mystical, the unexplained, the paranormal.
It offers some kind of hope, doesn't it?
That there's still mysteries to solve, still things to be discovered.
That there could still be something so groundbreaking, so paradigm shifting, as to finally change the world for the better.
The idea that we might have more control over ourselves, our lives, our environments, that we might think through tapping into higher powers.
It's incredibly alluring.
I loved Matilda as much as the next neurodivergent kid.
But you know these hippies?
These backpacking, barefooted, fisherman pant-wearing, free spirits?
They think they're better than you.
They really do.
They're always going on about society.
How everyone's brainwashed into being materialistic.
And with zero understanding of a Marxist analysis of false consciousness either.
No, it's all these normies running their rat races for absolutely no reason whatsoever.
Why don't they just...own nothing?
And live out of a backpack?
And work cash in hand jobs in countries where you don't even have a work permit like they do.
It's easy.
It's so simple.
All you need to do is open your third eye.
Connect with the universe and appreciate the higher things in life, like weed and yoga.
Their ideologies are absolutely riddled with hierarchy.
And they absolutely believe that they are better than most people.
I really hate to think how close I was to buying into some really harmful ideologies the whole time.
Thinking that I was just learning cool and interesting things.
If I had been told as a young teenager that I was a star seed or a Pleiadian or something.
I hate to admit it, but I think I might have eaten that shit up.
I actually had a small obsession with the Pleiades.
The star constellation which I knew as the Seven Sisters.
It's that little pork chop shaped cluster that's always super bright and visible.
I thought it was cool as hell.
Like my absolute fave constellation.
I spent ages staring at it.
If some confident authoritative adult had told me then that I felt that connection because I'm actually from there.
And that's also why I don't fit in with the other kids.
I don't know where that would have led me, but it can't have been anywhere good.
There's always a danger in thinking that there is some higher, mystical, unknowable justification for things which at best we would usually think are controversial and at worst reprehensible.
When some unknown future is presumed to be true and allowed to justify apathy.
And that kind of thinking applies way beyond esoteric stuff.
Hello climate doomers.
As somebody who loves it so much, I have to concede that magical thinking opens the doors wide open to dismissing the actual material reality of our lives right now.
It keeps us from realizing our actual powers.
From learning about the ways that we can actually change things for the better.
It's atomizing and it's individualist.
It's basically the law of attraction with extra steps.
See my video on the law of attraction?
We don't need to provide material support to people.
We don't need to dismantle and replace our systems.
We don't need to put in the hard work required to actually care for those who need care.
We just need to learn how to meditate better.
Just learn how to meditate and then wait for the aliens to come and save us.
Or wait until the collective consciousness is operating at a high enough frequency.
And then everything will be okay.
It's not inherently white supremacist all of this stuff.
But it is inherently stifling of real action.
And it puts the blame on the individuals who are struggling.
Because, hey, probably you just didn't pray.
I mean, meditate well enough.
Also, look, I do get that meditation is, like, a good thing to do.
Like, it's good for, like, relieving stress and things like that.
You know, like, drinking enough water and getting enough sleep and exercise does.
The danger comes when you think that sitting in a room with your eyes closed is somehow benefiting humanity.
Or worse.
Thinking that it gives you access to some kind of secret higher knowledge.
Making you a better person.
More open.
More aware.
More in tune.
Honestly, most of the backpacking hippies that I met who meditated all the time.
Were some of the most out of touch people I have ever met in my life.
I joke now that I might have ended up in a cult.
If I'd actually attended half of the events I'd been invited to.
Social anxiety for the win.
I met a number of cultists over the years.
Like, actual members of actual cults who were trying to recruit for them.
And while I did know about the dangers of cults.
I didn't know how to immediately spot them.
And I didn't know that many of the ideas that I was consuming and espousing on a near daily basis.
Had their origins in some of the worst ideas that humans have ever had.
People that are higher vibrational souls.
People that are conscious beings.
Not NPCs.
Not organic portals.
That actually have souls and personalities.
When this TikTok made it to Twitter, it was roundly mocked for the silliness cities.
Just to let you know, neurotypical people don't have to use any brain power to do things like shower.
Wash their face.
Brush their teeth.
It happens automatically for them.
And they also don't hear any voices while they're doing it.
They're not thinking to themselves.
So in the morning they wake up.
It's quiet.
And their body goes and washes their face and brushes their teeth all by itself.
They just fucking wake up and it happens.
Like neurotypical people don't have an inner monologue.
That's not, guys, that's not a thing.
Other people don't have that.
It's quiet in their heads.
Some people may wish to defend this creator.
They might want to point out that she was referring to the fact that people with ADHD struggle to form habits.
And how even daily tasks require intentional thought and effort.
That rarely do we do things without thinking,
Okay, I need to do this thing now.
What is the first step?
And that's a thing that is worth discussing.
But I actually think that this clip is a really good example of how seemingly well-intentioned advocacy can slip into dangerous generalizations.
It's one thing to talk about the struggles of neurodivergent people to form habits.
But it's quite another to imply that neurotypical people are empty-headed, thoughtless drones.
Are neurotypical people just bodies going about the world without thought?
How would that work?
Like if they're just bodies going around doing behaviors with zero motivation or autonomy behind them whatsoever.
It'd be like they're programmed.
Like characters in a video game.
Neurotypical people are just the NPCs of the world.
Neurotypical people are NPCs and you can't convince me otherwise.
All neurotypical people are NPCs.
Neurotypical people are just real life NPCs.
I don't think simulation theory is true.
But if it is, neurotypical people are most definitely the NPCs.
I like to just call NT people NPCs.
I have a theory that neurotypical people are NPCs.
Neurotypical people are just NPCs.
Life is a simulation and we need NPCs to make up what's normal.
It literally sims half the time. I've no clue what anyone's saying because they're so passive aggressive.
The way I can describe having ADHD or being neurodivergent for me personally.
It's like being a main character in a first person RPG full of ideas and curiosity and...
Well, neurotypical people are the NPCs.
NT people might be NPCs.
Neurotypical people are 100% NPCs.
They can only follow scripted prompts.
NT people should have been called NPCs because they're basic.
Neurotypical people are NPCs.
Neurotypical straight people are NPCs.
I always say engaging with neurotypicals is like engaging with NPCs with a dialogue wheel.
But when meeting with other neurodivergent or autistic folk, it's like another player and I don't need the dialogue wheel anymore.
Ever since learning about how neurotypicals operate from hashtag actually autistic twitter, NT is just all appear as NPCs to me.
I'm gonna be completely honest. Neurotypical people are like NPCs to me.
I refuse to believe neurotypical people exist. They gotta be NPCs. There's just no way that's real.
Don't you ironically feel like almost all NT people live their lives as NPCs though?
What if all neurodivergent people are in a simulation and the neurotypical people are the NPCs and that's why they're always depressed?
I'm convinced that neurotypical people are just NPCs.
Being diagnosed with autism is good. Why would you want to be neuro-
A neurotypical. Ah, yes, yes, yes, because we're dehumanising.
Some may call this junk. But me, I call it junk.
Absolute rubbish. Garbage, if you will. Absolute steaming pile of trash takes.
If you're a young person watching this, please bear with this slightly older person while they try and explain to other slightly older people what an NPC Wojak is.
Oh god.
Okay.
NPC stands for non-player character and refers to a character in a game who is not controlled by the player.
It originally referred to characters in tabletop roleplay games, but these days it more often refers to those background and side characters in video games.
I can't assume everyone watching this has played a video game so quickly.
While you're running around as the main character playing the game, you've got all these people around.
Maybe they have a few lines of dialogue or they offer you a side quest.
Maybe they run the local tavern, market stall or city guard.
Maybe they follow you around on certain quests but can never keep up.
They're the pedestrians you unthinkingly run over with your car.
The collateral damage during the shootouts with the other NPCs.
They're everyone but the player.
And they don't really matter.
Now, the NPC Wojak meme is a meme which, like most memes do, started on 4chan.
And it was a variant of another kind of Wojak which started on some other kind of chan years earlier.
Basically, your NPC Wojak meme gained in popularity in 2016, among conservative, libertarian and far-right circles, as well as your edgy, edgy lords who frequent places like 4chan.
It was a way to disparage liberals, leftists, social justice warriors.
Who, according to the memers, don't actually want to challenge the status quo, but rather just repeat slogans unthinkingly.
They are told what to think and say and interacting with them is like in a video game when you accidentally talk to somebody twice and they give you the exact lines word for word once more.
Like snowflakes, cucks or libtards.
NPC has become a popular insult for criticizing Democrats and other left-leaning web users.
Accusing them of being unable to think for themselves, parroting orthodoxies of inclusivity rather than challenging mainstream assumptions.
Of course, you know, it was always clear that these mainstream assumptions that needed to be challenged were things like,
people deserve human rights and like, fascism is bad! Challenge it!
The whole NPC meme thing is what I believe the kids these days call a cope.
I mean, it couldn't possibly be that people genuinely hold ideas of equality and liberty for all.
That people are genuinely passionate about fighting discrimination and things like feminism.
that everyone isn't as lonely and cynical and self-centred as you, no.
No, they must just be saying all that because they were told to.
Now people genuinely think this stuff, you're just a bad person.
But aside from it being a massive and cringe as fuck coat, it was also a way to dehumanise vast swathes of people.
NPCs don't matter.
They aren't real.
It also has to do with that simulation hypothesis, which I really don't want to talk about,
but I will link some things in the description if you're interested.
But briefly, it's a modern adaption of the how-do-we-know-we're-not-just-dreaming question,
which philosophers have been chewing on for literal millennia.
But there are people like Elon Musk who do think that we're living in a computer simulation
because he half-read Nick Bostrom but none of his critics.
And basically like, what if part of this simulation was NPCs?
That's the thing they say.
If you go looking, you'll find loads of videos of NPCs taken by people who think they've spotted a glitch in the system.
It's wild.
These are players glitching in real life.
It is exciting for everyone.
There are five active guys who have never played for the Thunder in chess.
Y'all know how I feel about my neighborhood, right?
And how it's a fucking simulation?
Like literally all the houses are the same, right?
Why the fuck are all these white cars like deadass?
Guys, this girl keeps repeating the same thing over and over.
She's going to get out of her car.
Watch her.
She's doing this three times.
Look at this.
She heard me.
She said something.
Yeah, I'm okay.
Are you okay?
Okay.
No, you are not real.
No, ma'am, you are not real.
NPCs don't matter.
They aren't real.
They are empty headed.
Programmed to behave in certain ways and they get in the way.
Moving around the world in ways that shows how separated from reality they are.
NPCs don't matter.
They aren't real.
If they die, nothing bad happens.
After all, they're just clogging up the place.
Making life annoying for the adventurers.
Maybe if they weren't there, it'd be better.
What good do they actually do?
I mean, some of them might be useful for some things, but most just aren't.
They're just a waste of resources, really.
They're not a person in the same way that you're a person.
There is a long history of people, white people, trying to determine in exactly what ways other people aren't people in the same way that they're people.
To be more specific, in the same way that white, able-bodied, middle and upper class, Christian, but not Catholic men are people.
From the mid-18th century, focus was on things like phrenology and physiognomy, observations of people's physical characteristics as a way to determine mental traits.
In particular, intellectual capacity, criminality, and moral worth.
But by the mid-19th century, with interest in evolution booming, the academic fields focused their attention on genetics and the heritability of traits.
Everything was explained away by genetics, because they had a very simplistic and ideological understanding of it.
Science wasn't really science back then.
Like, valid discoveries were made, don't get me wrong, but it didn't operate according to the standards of the scientific method which we expect today.
All kinds of things were blamed on genes.
At one point, they were trying to find a seafaring gene by going to fishing villages and interviewing fishermen and sailors.
Oh my god, your dad was also a fisherman?
One of the only three available jobs in this village?
Wow, it must be in the blood!
So, Darwin, you know him, the evolution guy, he had this cousin who was absolutely obsessed with him.
Francis Galton was a bit of an oddball, it seems to me.
Someone who loved to learn and research and by all accounts was pretty obsessed with classifying everything.
Including the hotness of women.
He even made a beauty map of Britain, based on a secret grading of the local women on a scale from attractive to repulsive.
The low point was in Aberdeen.
How many horrors need unleashing onto the world by the horniness of men?
Francis Galton coined the term eugenics and is widely thought to be the father of the idea.
Inspired by Darwin's work on the domestication of animals, old Francis thought that the same logic could, nay, ought to be applied to the human race.
And unlike his attempts to statistically quantify the efficacy of prayer, or to perfect the formula for the objectively best cup of tea, eugenics really took off for him.
He also did some useful things, like his design for a weather map is still basically what we use now, and some other stuff to do with fingerprints, I don't know, or care.
This eugenics thing.
This really made a name for Francis Galton.
The industrial revolution had created masses of working poor, which were clogging up the streets of London and getting in the way of rich people's carriages and stuff, which was super annoying and disgusting, and so polite society wanted to do something about it.
Some people at the time had wacky ideas, such as, like, housing people, or taking care of people, you know, blue-haired, woke nonsense like that.
But that seemed like, A, it would, like, take some work, and B, as if, like, environmental changes mattered.
Couldn't possibly be true.
Class was seen as something which was ingrained, innate.
And, you know, there was plenty of empirical proof for this.
I have conducted empirical research.
I went outside and looked around, and I have observed that poor people live poor and die poor.
And furthermore, the offspring of said poor are also poor.
Furthermore, I have noted that those who were born wealthy also typically die wealthy.
It has become clear to me through my observations and upon consulting with acquaintances of mine, who are knowledgeable on such matters,
that when the wealthy reproduce, their offspring inevitably become wealthy themselves.
And, as we have discussed, the same goes for the poor.
So, I mean, what good would actually helping them do?
After all, if class were merely a condition of circumstances that one happens to find themselves born into,
then that would mean that the upper classes don't deserve to be there.
It's absurd.
Eugenics was first used to support the idea that class, and therefore poverty, was genetic.
And this was explained through the lens of mental capacity.
Intelligence.
Intelligence.
I'm going to talk a whole lot more about intelligence later, but just quickly.
These early eugenics guys were obsessed with the idea of genius.
Obsessed.
And how did Sir Francis of Galton go about quantifying this?
By observing the successful.
I kid you not, this man just went out there and went like,
okay, who's rich?
Who's successful?
Who's the leaders of their fit?
Oh my God.
It's white, middle and upper class men.
Good for them.
And so Francis Galton concluded that intelligence was inherited through the male genes of the upper class.
I kid you not.
Arsehole went and wrote a seminal work based off that too.
According to Galton's brain thoughts, this man should be at the peak of genetic superiority.
I'm not joking or being unfair or hyperbolic or anything when I say that these early eugenicists genuinely thought that the reason that they were rich and had nice lives were because they were intelligent enough to see the utility of wealth.
Whereas all those feeble minded poor simply don't realise that living in a big house with servants is nice.
One of the first acts of the early London eugenicists was to close down homes for inebriated women.
They closed down welfare programs all over the place and they also focused as well on positive eugenics.
That's the idea of positively selecting for desirable traits.
This mostly involved pressuring people, especially middle and upper class women, to be very selective about who they have babies with.
And then to have as many as possible.
At points they even managed to paint this as some kind of feminism empowering women to choose.
Despite it being the opposite.
Cementing the idea that it's a woman's duty to better humanity by becoming a birthing machine to selected men.
Which is a theme that still runs strongly on the right today.
Couples who were deemed to be eugenic were encouraged to have as many babies as possible.
And the name Eugene skyrocketed in popularity.
But despite attempts, notably from Winston Churchill, negative eugenics in the form of sterilization of the feeble minded never made it into law in the UK.
While the western world was becoming captivated by ideas of genetics and evolution.
Those with privilege and power were working on novel applications of these ideas.
Applications which would work towards the purity of the race.
Evolution was hardly understood by people who could not keep that word out of their mouths.
By many in the 18th and early 19th century, evolution was seen as a ladder.
A hierarchy.
From least evolved to more evolved.
From the least human to the most human.
And the way that this would be determined would be based solely on the subjective observations of white upper class men and explorers.
Humans would be ranked based on their proximity to whiteness.
And theories would be created to support the idea that the white race, the Caucasian race, the Aryan race, were the most evolved.
The most human.
Before evolution, Europeans usually rested on polygenism to explain humanity.
That's the idea that human races have different origins.
That perceived races came into existence separately.
Almost classifying them as different species.
From Wikipedia.
During the late 17th century and early 18th century, many countries first began to encounter different races from other countries due to colonial expansion and increases in trade routes.
Because of the encounters with different races, many people could not believe that they had the same ancestry as other races.
Many explorers and scientists visited other countries to observe and study different races and write down their findings.
Later, they went back to their own countries to publish books and journals on their findings and claim that the evidence supported polygenism.
In Europe, in the 19th century, the general public had favoured polygenism, as many believed it contradicted the Genesis account and was thus more scientific than religious monogenism.
It's science because it's the opposite of what the Bible says.
Monogenism is the idea that humanity had one single origin.
But polygenism was mad popular.
I often cite David Hume, but he was a massive polygenist.
So was Voltaire.
And a huge number of European explorers and academics.
Polygeny was the first tool of the race scientists.
But there's a problem with using polygeny to do racism.
Because different doesn't automatically mean worse.
You have to, like, do some extra mental gymnastics to kind of show that certain races are superior or inferior.
But evolution?
The wrong idea that humans evolved in a linear manner from mostly like monkeys to actually human?
Well, that provided a much better rationale for racism.
People with autism are operating on a higher plane of humanity.
They hold up half the sky.
They are the next stage of human evolution.
I believe that those with autism are part of the next stage in human evolution.
They think and see things on a level we can't.
Evolution has not perfected it yet.
But maybe the normal people, as society has labelled us, are the weird ones for not evolving.
I lowkey think that increasing rates of Asperger's and autism is the next stage of human evolution.
Developing a sixth sense almost that presents itself with sensory issues.
Autism is the next stage of human evolution.
And you're apparently too ignorant and ableist to understand the distinction between illness and divergence.
Know why more and more autistic people exist?
It's nothing bad.
It's nothing caused by a product or a vaccine.
What we are here referring to as autism is actually the next stage of human evolution.
Calling us a disease is simply the old model diagnosing the new as defective.
Autism is the next stage of evolution.
Cope and seethe neurotypicals.
Autism isn't an illness.
It's probably the next stage of human evolution.
The doctors call it autism.
But really it's just the next stage of human evolution.
Next stage?
It's existed since like time immemorial.
All these guys had it.
Probably.
Also a bunch of people who weren't painted or photographed too.
Ongoing process.
Not the final development yet.
Give it a few more generations.
The idea of evolution as a ladder persists.
I mean I guess it's quite difficult to draw it any other way than this.
But it's not so structured.
It's not in any way so simplistic.
Our genetics are unfathomably complex.
And exposed to thousands of variables.
What's passed on or not is almost impossible to predict.
Because it's not just that there is like a gene for a thing.
There's not a depression gene.
Or an anxiety gene.
Or a seafaring gene.
I couldn't possibly explain to you exactly how modern humans evolved.
And not just because this video is already too long.
But because the people who know don't even know.
We're still discovering all kinds of crap.
Did you see that thing about the cave?
And...
Homeowner lady.
And how they were burying their dead like 100,000 years before Homo sapiens even existed.
And like 300,000 years before we thought the first burials took place.
Like look at this absolute mess from Wikipedia.
According to the recent African origin of modern humans theory.
Modern humans evolved in Africa.
Possibly from Homo heidelbergensis.
Homo rodensiensis.
Or Homo antecessor.
And migrated out of the continent some 50,000 to 100,000 years ago.
Gradually replacing local populations of Homo erectus.
Homo erectus.
Denisova hominens.
Homo flore...
This was a mistake.
Homo flore...
Florensiensis.
Homo luzonensis.
And homo...
Neanderthals.
Neanderthals.
Like I mean they've got things narrowed down.
But there's a lot of wiggle room there.
There was overlap.
Crossbreeding.
Coexistence.
All kinds of variables which make the ladder view of evolution look kinda silly in my eyes.
But racists in the 19th and early 20th century took this view of evolution as a ladder and ran with it.
Boy.
Did they run.
It was perfect.
White people are simply the most evolved.
The least like animals.
And for a while they set out placing people on this hierarchy based on their physical characteristics.
But this was muddy work.
Physical characteristics aren't ubiquitous across races.
And a great deal of liberty was taken with the analyzing of data.
They needed something more stable on which to rest their ideology.
A more scientific way to ascertain where on the evolutionary hierarchy a person ought to be placed.
And the thing that they would come to lean on.
The tool they would wield to do great atrocities.
Was intelligence.
Fans Asperger described autistic children as little professors.
Partly because of their unusual way of speaking.
But mostly because of their ability to talk at length and in detail about things which interested them.
Like little professors teaching a class.
Or YouTubers.
The info dump is well known.
And it's also well known that autistic people can get a lot of joy out of the info dumps of others.
Okay I'm gonna stop saying dump now.
The DSM talks about like restricted intense interests or something.
But we usually call it special interests.
And it is now a well-worn trope for autistic characters in media.
Many autistic people have special interests.
But it behooves you to remember throughout this discussion that not all do.
Special interests is just one subcategory of the diagnostic checklist that you don't actually need to meet in order to be diagnosed.
Many autistic people have multiple special interests.
Sometimes all at once and other times it fluctuates over time.
That's more or less how I am.
My special interests can be very intense to the point where I don't want to nor can think effectively about other things.
I've felt this way about books.
TV shows.
Movies.
Cats.
The paranormal.
Macrame at one point.
Plants and growing food.
Philosophy.
Politics.
British parliamentary politics circa 2016 to 2019.
Seriously ask me anything.
Autism and neurodiversity was a special interest of mine for a long time.
And it's not like I'm over these things.
I'm still deeply invested in them.
I still want to learn more about them.
Still want to talk about them.
Just ask my friends how often I wedge Jeremy Corbyn into conversations.
I've spoken before on this channel about how I lost months of my life to my Xbox.
Basically unable to do anything other than work and game.
Special interests can result in PhDs.
But also vitamin D deficiencies.
Special interests can turn harmful when the autistic person becomes unable to regulate themselves while participating.
When we forget to drink water and use the bathroom.
To keep ourselves moving and washed and fed.
But special interests can be extremely comforting to autistic people.
Engaging with your special interests can actually be one of the best ways to regulate yourself.
To calm down in times of stress.
What makes an interest special is the intensity of the interest.
The amount of time one wishes to spend on it.
The amount of mental energy one dedicates to it.
It's the thing that motivates.
Creates joy.
Gets you out of bed in the morning.
Reminds you that there are actually some really cool things in this world after all.
And so autistic people can spend an awful lot of time reading up on their interest.
Gathering as much knowledge about it as they possibly can.
And also taking great joy in sharing this knowledge with others.
But.
But.
I want to put this delicately.
Um.
Because many autistic people do become experts.
Like world leaders in their fields.
And probably a bunch of people in the past who invented stuff were actually autistic too.
I think we do often provide a unique way of looking at things.
And I do think that our ability to be perfectly happy.
Deep diving into subjects.
Dedicating huge parts of our lives to our passion.
That this means that we are more likely to discover stuff.
That we are more likely to connect ideas in novel ways.
More likely to spot patterns and predict possible outcomes.
I think it means that we are more likely to pursue careers that involve research, experimentation, and discovery.
Like theoretical physics probably is a field which autistic people are more likely to pursue.
Cause you need to be really dedicated to that shit just to understand it.
But.
But.
But.
But.
Don't get me wrong.
Okay.
But.
But like.
None of that.
None of that means that.
A.
Autistic people are just inherently better at understanding things.
Or even.
B.
That if a subject is an autistic person's special interests.
Then that means that they are always right about it.
Just let that.
Sit.
For a sec.
Let that sink in.
Oh I'm getting nervous.
Being autistic means I need clarity.
I need understanding of information.
I need to understand everything about it.
When I question what you've asked me or what you've told me.
Or the information you've provided me.
I'm trying to understand it in its entirety.
For me.
If I don't have the full picture.
It's hard for me to engage in a task.
Because what if there's a variable I've missed.
You can never know all of the variables.
And the implication.
That.
When an autistic person says.
Yeah.
I understand that thing.
That that means they know everything there is to know about it.
No.
I don't like the implication.
It's a bad implication.
Yes.
We often do need more information than some other people might.
Before we are fully able to conceptualise a thing.
But you can spend hours.
Days.
Years even.
Reading about a topic.
And still never actually read anything that is worthwhile or true.
Just log on to any new age homeopathy raw milk mom Facebook group.
And see for yourself.
Just because somebody has read a lot.
Or dedicated a lot of time to a topic.
That doesn't in itself mean that they are an expert on that thing.
I was talking to a young man once.
I think he was about.
Like.
19.
And he said.
I don't consider myself to be an expert on anything.
Except for physics.
Which is what I'm studying at university.
I wonder like.
If you consider yourself to be an expert.
While you're in your first year of an undergrad program.
What do you think your professor is?
I have heard.
Numerous people.
Say.
That.
An autistic person with a special interest.
Will know more.
Than.
Experts.
In that field.
Because.
They will have read.
Everything.
Absolutely.
Everything.
On the topic.
They will have covered.
Every.
Possible.
Variable.
But.
To read.
Everything.
On a topic.
Is probably impossible.
And.
To read.
Up to date.
Research.
On many.
Academic.
Subjects.
You will need.
Access.
To.
Are.
Horrendously.
Expensive.
But.
It is.
Possible.
For.
An autistic.
Person.
With.
A special interest.
To know.
More.
Than.
My.
My.
My.
GP.
Does.
Please.
She's.
She's.
A doctor.
But.
I know.
More.
About.
EDS.
Possible.
To.
My.
To.
As.
To.
To.
To.
объ
differently. And yes, I think everybody experiences the world differently. But I also think that there
are enough shared kinds of differences, which is how we group people into being autistic or not.
But we are not more or less intelligent. We are not better at thinking. Many autistic people have
learning disabilities. I've said it before, I think I have dyscalculia. Not in any rush to get tested,
but I'm pretty sure. I needed special assistance at school to scrape a passing grade in maths.
And that was after my maths teacher predicted that I would get a U grade. U stands for ungraded. Like
you're so bad, you didn't even fail. We're not even going to bother marking you. She put that on like
one of my final year reports that I would get a U in maths. And then like it was this whole thing
because then I couldn't get into college and I had to get extra tuition. And I hated it. And I hated
it. But no, like I can't even understand sentences if they have too many numbers in them. When I hear
a number, conceptually, nothing happens. And that trope of autistic people being dead good at numbers
is actually something that put me off the scent of my own autism for a really long time. According to the
NHS, 29% of people who have learning disabilities are also autistic. And autistic people do not, on average,
have higher IQs than the general population. But you wouldn't think that if you heard some of his
talk. Wow. Autistic people have more neurons, higher connectivity within the brain, and are generally
more intelligent than neurotypicals. So why have you guys decided autistic people are disordered when you
are literally cognitively stunted, if not autistic, if we are being objective. I've come to the
conclusion that autistic people, whether they're high functioning or not, are more often than not,
far more intelligent, insightful, and astute as compared to those who are not autistic. Autistic
people in general have higher IQs than most lol. They're like superhumans. Autistic people are far more
intelligent, empathetic, kind, caring, and discerning than the average human. Wait till he finds out
autistic people are more intelligent on average. Er, maybe it's just autistic people are more logical
and more logical people make better product decisions. Studies show autistic people are more logical and
rational and we tend to ask questions. Religion hates that. Not even close, my G. You have no idea the
shite I know. Plus, I'm autistic, so my brain works 10 times faster than the average brain. Hey! Autistic
people are generally far more intelligent than normal people, so maybe keep your i-it mouth shut.
The autistic genius trope is, in my opinion, an incredibly harmful invention of Hollywood, but I see
it being embraced as an identity in certain corners of the internet. I've had a few run-ins now with people
who have genius in their bio or who have gifted or their IQ in there somewhere. I'm not upset about this
because of the statistics or the harmful tropes. No, I'm upset because IQ is racist, classist, misogynistic bollocks.
In 1892, France passed a law that said that all children, except for blind and deaf kids, should be
in education. But by 1904, teachers had started to complain that some children were simply unable to
follow the curriculum which was in place. And so, the French powers that were, decided that these
children would be exempt from the law. But what to do with them? It was argued by French psychiatrists
that these children should be placed into the care of hospitals and asylums. But French psychologist
Alfred Binet argued that instead of treating them like medical conditions, children who were struggling
to follow the curriculum should be instead given specialist education. He knew that the French
government would need a scalable way to determine what kinds of help these children needed, and that
teachers would need a way to test the children in their class. And so he developed the Binet-Simone
test, commonly known as the first ever IQ test. But our Alfred would have hated that, and we're about to
learn why. So Binet initially tried to use craniology, but he quickly realised that it's a load of rubbish,
all this skull measuring stuff. He couldn't even replicate his own findings, let alone anyone else
is. So he stopped trying to find intellect in the physical, and instead turned to psychology.
His tests largely asked subjects to identify and interact with pictures, and there were many,
many varied questions. In fact, he argued that there should be as many as possible, to better determine
the individual needs of the child. But Binet was super freaking clear about a couple of things.
Firstly, his tests should never, not ever, be used preemptively. Rather, it should only be
administered after a teacher has identified that a child is struggling. Secondly, he was pretty adamant
that his tests do not measure intelligence. The scale, properly speaking, does not permit the measure of
the intelligence, because intellectual qualities are not superposable, and therefore cannot be measured as
linear surfaces are measured. Binet was the inventor of the mental age, in the sense that his tests
determined how many years behind their peers was the subject. And a child that was three years behind their
peers was labelled retired, chosen from the Latin word to be held back or slow.
But Binet did warn about placing too much meaning on all this mental age stuff.
We feel it necessary to insist on this fact because, later, for the sake of simplicity of statement,
we will speak of a child of eight years having the intelligence of a child of seven years or nine years.
These expressions, if accepted arbitrarily, may give place to illusions.
Illusions. Illusions of being able to meaningfully measure intelligence,
and illusions about what those pseudo-measurements might mean.
Binet's tests were only designed to see if a particular child was struggling with a particular curriculum
at a particular time, and nothing more. Binet saw the dangers of what he had created.
He worried that lazy teachers would use his tests to just get rid of difficult students.
He worried that a bad score might create a self-fulfilling prophecy, and ruin the prospects
and opportunities awarded to a child. Binet did not believe that intelligence was measurable
or innate. At that time, as we've learned, hereditarianism was the prevalent way of looking
at race, genetics, personality traits, class, bloody everything. It's the ideology on which
eugenics rested. Binet wasn't a hereditarian, and he never intended what came to be. From the
mismeasure of man. But of one thing Binet was sure. Whatever the cause of poor performance in
school, the aim of his scale was to identify in order to help and improve, not to label in order
to limit. The purpose of his tests was to provide. But they would soon be used to remove millions of
people, of their rights, bodily autonomy, freedom of movement, and their lives. So what happened?
From the mismeasure of man, Binet insisted upon three cardinal principles for using his tests.
All of his caveats were later disregarded and his intentions overturned by the American
hereditarians who translated his scale into written form as a routine device for testing all children.
Number one. The scores are a practical device. They do not buttress any theory of intellect.
They do not define anything innate or permanent. We may not designate what they measure as intelligence
or any other rarefied entity. Number two. The scale is a rough empirical guide for identifying
learning disabled children who need help. It is not a device for ranking all children.
Number three. Whatever the cause of difficulty in children identified for help, emphasis shall be
placed on improvement. Low scores shall not be used to mark children as innately incapable.
Henry Herbert Goddard was an American psychologist, eugenicist, and segregationist who got his hands on a
copy of the Binet-Simone test and lost his fucking mind. He was a proper piece of work. He wrote a book
called The Calicac Family, a study in the heredity of feeble-mindedness, which became the primary text
proving the truth of hereditary feeble-mindedness. The text was so full of holes that even Goddard himself
admitted it was pretty sloppy work, but you know, of course. Not before it was a huge hit. Goddard translated
the Binet-Simone test into English, and he turned it into a written test which could be given to people
on a mass scale, in order to classify the human race. Goddard used his tests to classify people as follows.
Goddard used the term for those with an IQ of 51 to 70, for those with an IQ of 26 to 50,
and for those with an IQ of 0 to 25. According to Goddard,
were unfit for society and should be removed either through institutionalization, sterilization, or both.
At one point, Goddard suggested that should be exiled to a colony to perish.
He was particularly concerned about m****s, was Goddard. They were the worst ones, in his opinion,
because they were more likely to breed. In fact, he even said that they were more likely to be
promiscuous. Later in life, Goddard decided that actually, instead of being sent away or locked up,
that m****s could be put to work, you know, of course, as long as they were prevented from breeding.
At that time, American leaders and members of the elite were growing increasingly concerned
about immigration from Eastern and Southern Europe. You see, immigration used to be a good thing,
you know, back when it was the British and the Germans and the French coming over. But now it's
the Polish and the Hungarians and the Russians and the Italians. No, now. Now it's a threat to the
racial purity of the land. American hereditarians and eugenicists were freaking out, and Great
Replacement-esque theories began to take hold across academia and politics. And so, the idea that we could
use a written test to weed out the undesirables and stop them from even being in the country at all?
Well, you can see why it appealed. Goddard had concluded that there was a feeble-mindedness gene,
because of course he did. And wouldn't this be a great way of filtering it out? One of the first
uses of Goddard's new version of the Benet-Simone test was on Ellis Island. It was given to immigrants,
fresh off the boat. Literally as soon as they stepped off the boat. Testing conditions were
atrocious. And the tests themselves were even worse. They required previous knowledge of American
brands and cultural references. They required subjects to know what a written test was even
for at a time when they were literally brand new concepts. They required subjects to know how to write
with a pencil and the language barrier. Did they translate things? No, of course they didn't.
That would be too hard. Nobody speaks Italian. No, the language barrier led to examiners going to
really rather creative lengths to be understood, which only confused subjects more. They were trying
to mime concepts. The data from these tests was used to determine the average IQ of different European
countries. And would you believe it? But immigrants from Britain, Germany and France came out on top.
And at the bottom came, came the immigrants from the Catholic. I mean, the southern and eastern
European countries. When we think back on historical racism, I think we tend to project our modern
understanding of it onto the past. These people were racist to such a granular extent that they were
separating North Germans from Southern Germans. And the tippity-top bestest race that you could
possibly be if you were an immigrant to the USA back then was Nordic. These guys were so hard for
the Nords, I swear to God. You have good genes, you know that, right? You have good genes.
A lot of it's about the genes, isn't it? Don't you believe? The racehorse theory you think was so
different. You have good genes in Minnesota. This is a map of the supposed races of Europe.
And each group was assigned a different average IQ. Just look at this shit for a sec.
But the data from the immigration centers wasn't enough for some people. People who wanted psychology
to be seen as a legitimate science, which at the time it was not. People like Robert Yerkes. Robert
really wanted psychology to be treated like a real science. But the results from the earlier IQ
tests weren't robust enough for that. There wasn't enough data and there was too much variation in the
way that previous tests had been administered. So he assembled an elite team of hereditarian eugenicists
to create a new test which would be administered to members of the armed forces. They created the first
mass-produced intelligence tests, commonly known as the army alpha beta tests. And they ended up with
1.75 million results to work with. Huge amounts of data, which could now be directly used to lend
scientific legitimacy to the field of psychology and also racism. By the 1920s, mass testing had arrived,
and the newly formed testing industry became immensely profitable. And the results of the army and the
Ellis Island tests were immediately used to define racial averages of intelligence. But those army
tests were as deeply flawed as the Ellis Island ones. I can't get into the many, many reasons why the
math was not mathing. But rest assured, the methodology was fucked at every level. So one example,
they should have recalled loads of soldiers to be retested as per their own rules, but they just
didn't. And so hundreds of mostly black soldiers were just left with inaccurate low scores. Another
example, they got way too many zeros. So usually if you're running a test and you get an unexpectedly high
number of zeroes, that usually means there's something wrong with your test. And the examiners
at the time even said as much. And it's not surprising when you consider that they were just
cramming soldiers into rooms and then verbally calling out the instructions for each question.
So the people at the back just didn't hear. And this, this didn't come up in my reading. I'm
just spitballing here, but I wonder what kind of soldier or person would always end up at the back
of the room in the 1920s. There was also significant pressure on the test subjects. The tests were not
anonymous and they weren't even told why they were taking them. And at times the examiners, it'd just be
shouting at them, do it quicker, fast, like it was timed. And they were just like, quicker, work harder,
now, fast. And of course, the tests, again, required previous knowledge, which they should not do
if they're trying to measure innate intelligence. And on top of all that, the army bosses absolutely
hated the whole thing. They didn't like these psychologists coming in and demanding their time
and resources. Remember, psychology was not seen as a legitimate science back then. And so the
examiners faced a lot of scepticism, even hostility. Based army generals? No, probably not. And then,
after even all of that, they basically cooked the numbers anyway. And they denied any environmental
explanation for low results, because of course they bloody did. The data from the army and Ellis
Island tests were used to, one, decide that the average mental age of the population was 13,
which is just above what had been decided as one territory. This fuelled the idea that a lot of people
were incapable of critical, intelligent thought, who needed to be told what to do and controlled
by their intellectual betters. A perfectly fascistic idea, if ever I heard one. In fact, Goddard published
data from the army tests and wrote that this was proof that most Americans are unfit for democracy.
Two, the data was used to prove that European migrants could have their intelligence ranked simply
based on what country they came from. And finally, it determined that black people had a mental age
of 10. At times, it did seem to these hereditarian testers of intelligence that maybe their data was a
little bit off, and maybe most people aren't mons. But every time this happened, every time one of them
brought that up, they simply just arbitrarily shifted their parameters to make their findings seem more plausible.
And again, when presented with the idea that, hey, maybe environment and education can explain high
results in certain people, they were just like, nah, that's silly. No, you see, it's because naturally
intelligent people choose to get educated, actually. Obviously. Henry Goddard said that to test
somebody's intelligence was ascertaining by far the most important fact about them. Lewis Terman,
psychologist, eugenicist, and co-developer of the army tests, said in 1916 that the primary cause of
social pathology was innate feeble-mindedness. He wanted everyone to be tested, and he didn't want to just
use the tests to weed out the feeble-minded. He wanted to use them to identify genius. He encouraged
employers to test all of their employees, and he said that only those with an IQ over 100 should be
given any responsibility. And he wholeheartedly believed that entire racial groups could be
declared less intelligent. General intelligence. IQ. This became the primary tool of eugenicists
and white supremacists.
Eugenicists' sterilization laws had existed in the USA since 1907, when Indiana passed the first ever
eugenics-based compulsory sterilization law in the world. Three years later, in 1909,
California passed its laws. And by 1921, California accounted for 80% of all the sterilizations performed
in the USA. But these state laws were opaquely worded, and there was issues with the implementation
of them. And for this reason, many states had held back on implementing their own laws. That was until
Mr. Harry H. Loughlin, an educator and eugenicist, made it his mission to simplify these sterilization laws.
By 1914, a mere 12 states had imposed compulsory sterilization laws, and to Mr. Loughlin, this was weak
shit from Wikipedia. Loughlin drafted the model eugenical sterilization law, a model act for
compulsory sterilization. He published his proposal in his 1922 study of American sterilization policy.
It included as subjects for eugenic sterilization the feeble-minded, the insane, criminals, epileptics,
alcoholics, blind persons, deaf persons, deformed persons, and indigent persons. An additional 18 states
passed laws based on Loughlin's model. One of Loughlin's biographers described him as
among the most racist and anti-semitic of early 20th century eugenicists. Again, from Wikipedia.
Loughlin provided extensive statistical testimony to the United States Congress in support of the
Johnson-Reed Immigration Act of 1924. Part of his testimony dealt with excessive insanity among
immigrants from southern Europe and eastern Europe. He also argued that most Jews were born feeble-minded.
Loughlin lobbied hard to keep Jewish refugees who were fleeing Europe out of the United States,
and he got his way. In 1933, something called the Law for the Prevention of Hereditary Diseased Offspring
passed in Nazi Germany, based extremely closely on Loughlin's model. Up to 800,000 people were
sterilized in the first year alone. And in 1933, Harry Loughlin would be awarded an honorary degree
for his work on the science of racial cleansing at the University of Heidelberg, Germany. Every single
eugenicists and IQ enthusiasts that we have covered today somehow paved the way for American sterilization
laws. Laws which directly inspired Adolf Hitler. Not only did he base his sterilization laws on American
ones, but in 1928 he spoke highly of the Immigration Act for banishing strangers of the blood. And when Nazi
legislators were framing their own laws, the US Immigration Act was cited favorably due to its ability
to exclude wholly foreign racial population masses. A story which began with the provision of education
for French children would end up back in Europe with the mass murder of thousands of German children.
Is this a video about Aspie supremacy or a documentary on the history of eugenics?
Yes. I'm not here to point out that Aspie supremacy talking points share similarities with white supremacy
talking points. I'm here to say that they're the exact same thing. It is eugenics. It is hereditarianism.
It is deterministic. It is hierarchical. It's basically a step away from phrenology, just like IQ tests are.
I mean, if you believe that being autistic makes you a better person, more intelligent, more morally
correct, more honest and trustworthy, more deep thinking, more critically thinking, more empathetic,
even sure why not? I've heard people say it. Then you believe that physical characteristics determine
personality traits. Just like the physiognomists. Exactly like every old white guy who argued that
genetics are deterministic. Autism is genes and brains and shit. And there are things that we can say
about it all and how it all coalesce is and stuff. You know, like the diagnostic criteria or whatever.
But all autistic people are different. Environment does matter. If you've met one autistic,
you've met one autistic. We don't share a personality. And there are plenty of shitty autistic people out
there doing incredibly unwise things. And I would rather not provide them with this kind of cover.
If you think that autism is the next step of human evolution, then that means you think of evolution
like steps. Just like all those twats. Oh, it's just so awful, isn't it? It's just so very pointedly cringe.
Did someone say cringe? Asperger's is a unique set of traits which is very likely to be the driver
behind some of the greatest human achievements to date. Asperger's is the single-minded determination
behind invention and innovation and the ability to create something different to standard thinking.
Human minds are locked within their barriers of social acceptability. Asperger's allows the expansion
beyond this. Nature manufactures us repeatedly. Perhaps there is an evolutionary reason for this.
Perhaps these extra traits have a special role to play in the progression of humankind.
We need to take ownership of our future. We need to understand that we are possibly one of the best
things that happened to human development. That's not how evolution works. An evolutionary reason.
I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't get into evolutionary psychology now.
I won't. But there are a bunch of evo-psych based things that people say to try and explain
autism, which I absolutely hate, but I can't. It's too late. I've been writing this thing for months.
That's not how it works. Evolution doesn't have reasons. It doesn't use logic to make decisions
about how it should go. It's not there for the betterment of our societies. That's religious thinking.
You're doing a religion. Evolution is a complex mess of coincidence, variables, random mutations,
change which happens over a really, really, really long time. It doesn't come in steps. It's
ever fluctuating fluid and we're only just beginning to understand it. If you are basing your identity,
your worth, as a person, in being intelligent. If you are dedicating part of your bio to your IQ,
then... Honestly, I don't hate you for it. We've got to have something, don't we?
Us nerdy introverted kids that's either be clever or funny, innit? It's often the thing that gets us
geeky neurodiverging kids through school, innit? Being good at something. The hope that one day you'll get to
do that thing and you'll be respected for being good at it. I don't want to take that hope away from
anyone. And if being clever is the thing that is getting you through, then fine. But if you are
clever, then you'll want to think a little bit deeper about how we view things such as intelligence
and IQ and genius. IQ tests do show something. They show that you're good at taking IQ tests and
that is something. And you don't need to be a rocket surgeon to know that there are many different
types of intelligence. In his book, The Mismeasure of Man, Gould argues that the main mistake that all
those guys made, and it's a mistake that we still make today, is thinking that there is such a thing.
A measurable, quantifiable thing. Those general intelligence. The reification of intelligence,
he called it. That book was one of my main sources for this video and at the time he published it,
IQ was getting a bit of a resurgence in popularity. Gould could not believe what he was witnessing.
The evidence for general intelligence, like that can be measured with IQ tests, is not even thin on
the ground. It's basically non-existent. IQ tests were designed by hereditarians in order to prove an
hereditarian theory of intelligence and nothing more. Not supposed to be designing tests to prove
hypotheses, we're supposed to be testing them. I didn't even mention the bell curve. Gould wrote
that the bell curve was completely disingenuous and manufactured pseudoscience. He called the text
a manifesto of conservative ideology. It's a book. It was published in 1994 and it was hugely
popular. It cited a load of white supremacists and it led to a boom in interest in IQ.
Yay. It's not your fault if you didn't know all that. If you didn't know that general intelligence is
a completely fabricated tool of race science. But you do now. And it's not your fault if you took a
little glee in the trash-talking of neurotypicals. I mean, whomst among us has not. Jokes are jokes.
And now they're no judged disabled people for taking the piss out the ableds. But I don't know. Sometimes...
What has autism taught you about people? That neurotypical people are easily programmed,
easy to control and fill up with hatred. An actually autistic person's ethics are consistent.
Regardless of how they feel about you. Even if they dislike you, they'll still treat you with
integrity. And neurotypical will change their ethics towards you based on whether they like
or dislike you. There is no integrity. Autistic people tend to have lower empathy.
Neurotypical liars who have no idea what empathy is. To be honest, the best way to deal with it that
I've found is to divest from connections with non-autistic people as much as possible. And have
subterranean expectations of them so you're always prepared for their antics. I've regularly experienced
people telling me to unalive myself for being unashamedly autistic. So I'm not going to be one of
those people who are kind or supportive of neurotypicals or holistics. American Psycho implies
heavily that your average neurotypicals are in fact sociopaths. Yeah, neurotypical people are
illiterate dumbasses for sure. It's kind of funny how they think I cannot have complex emotions. Wait till
they find out I can do things on my own. Wow, shocking right? You're a as well. Hope you know that.
After knowing what all this sticks, and especially neurotypicals are like, I avoid them like COVID.
Gross. I hate neurotypicals so much. I hope bad things happen to them, Si. The fact that they need
studies done before they believe this incredibly obvious fact is the clearest evidence that
neurotypicals are the absolute dumbest people on God's green earth. Can't even begin to fathom what
it must be like to go through life this pathologically stupid. It's hard to trust neurotypicals because
you never know when they're being fake. Neurotypicals are muggles. This is all that
neurotypicals are thinking about, by the way. This is literally the most profound thoughts that go through
their head. Neurotypicals are slippery. Talking to them is like nailing jello to a wall. I fucking
hate neurotypicals so much sometimes. Just fuck off and enjoy your privilege. The way I hate
neurotypicals so much, their irrelevant, invalid opinion means nothing. They are literally the worst.
I'm convinced a lot of them derive some sick and twisted and in cases sexual pleasure from the fact
that they keep us in positions which is not suited to our strengths. I hate you neurotypical people
so much. I think actually autistic people need to know that to their minds we're already guilty.
They don't care. It's to boost their egos at our expense. Also to eliminate us as perceived competition
for garbage that matters only to them, like popularity or procuring social or economic capital etc.
It's not like I feel sorry for neurotypical people. And anger among neurodivergent people
is justified. We are mistreated. We are forced to exist in a world which was designed without us in mind.
We are forced to endure our existence being a matter for debate. We are traumatised and abused,
and so, so what if we take a little moment to feel special? Nobody else is going to recognise
the things which make us special so why shouldn't we? We should. We always should. I celebrate my autism
just as much as I consider it to be a disability. We are unique. Just like everyone else. No, I hate
this vitriolic way of speaking about neurotypical people. Not just because of the supremacist vibes,
not just because it's mostly factually inaccurate, but because I worry about the young autistic people
listening to it. It must be scary, I'd imagine. To think that so many people are inherently dishonest,
manipulative and abusive. Must make you feel pretty lonely. Especially if you're neurodivergent friends,
or online, or few and far between. And let's face it, for most of us that's probably the case.
Must be pretty isolating, fear inducing. If I was an autistic kid,
listening to some of the descriptions about neurotypical people, I think the last thing
that I would want to do is enter society as an adult. I could imagine it provoking feelings of
paranoia even. When you know that you will never know what these people really mean because they
speak in riddles just to confuse you. They lie and manipulate and they hate honesty. They are
incapable of empathising with you. They are dangerously stupid but also they have power over you and of course
they hate you. And I wonder about the kind of person who might have an interest in conditioning or say
them. But the kind of person who is in this way grooming a population of already vulnerable people into
distrusting everyone around them. Into becoming more isolated than they already are.
it seems to me that this general distrust of all neurotypical people might create the kinds of
people who extremists, con artists, cultists and predators love to prey on. just so we're clear
i'm not calling any of the people i featured in this video a predator or a nazi. i'm talking about
ideas not people. i worry about the fascists too. i worry that they might see the utility in the
autistic population like they did back then. the goal of fascist supremacists is power and they
will stroke the egos of anybody they find useful until they do not anymore. do you think it's a
coincidence that we're seeing a rise in divine femininity discourse right at the same time that
fertility rates are dropping and attacks on reproductive rights are climbing. when a sense
of your own superiority is internalized then considering others to be less than you is built
in. and when you think that other people, any other kind of people, are worth less than you, don't
matter as much as you, don't produce as much as you, aren't people in the same way that you are a
person. no good will come from any kind of world view which implies supremacy or hierarchy. there will
be no freedom from oppression until everyone is free. there should be no room for supremacist notions
anywhere. least of all within the movement which considers itself to be progressive. there is
absolutely no justification for it. you can you can think that you're at the top of some hierarchy
if you want but unless you actually are like unless you're a billionaire or a dictator or something
dictators watching this please do leave a comment below unless you're one of those things you are
probably being played by someone who is. i do think that autistic people have unique abilities
and i also think that many of the things that should have been celebrated about us have been held
against us. i think all marginalized people have unique perspectives of the world and the structures
within it. perspectives which are integral to the dismantling and improvement of those structures.
but no one is free until everyone is free. those supremacist notions about who does and does not
deserve to be free can be turned against you the second you stop being useful. we like to talk about
histories potentially autistic genius but all of them are still middle and upper class white men. all the
memory skills in the world wasn't going to save an autistic kid who was born a peasant or a slave.
and if you think that you're so special with your big old brain and your unique ability to think
thoughts then you should know that with great power comes great responsibility. so what are you doing with
it genius? are you on tiktok bragging? disparaging others for not thinking as good as you? for being big old
thoughts is you can't even use their brains right? or are you using your big brain skills for the
betterment of your community? to provide security and abundance for those currently without? or are
you on the internet writing origin myths and world building the fiction where autistic people are
magical god-like aliens or whatever sent from the stars? asperger's is a unique set of traits which is
very likely to be the driver behind some of the greatest human achievements to date we need to
take ownership of our future we need to understand that we are possibly one of the best things that
happened to human development. that quote kind of reminds me of another quote i heard somewhere
all the human culture all the results of art science and technology that we see before us today
are almost exclusively the creative product of the arian he is the prometheus of mankind from whose
bright forehead the divine spark of genius has sprung at all times if he dies out or declines
the dark veils of an age without culture will again descend on this globe
i bet you're wondering what this is here why i chose to film this here next to this busy road
i'm in berlin at the memorial for the victims of the nazis child euthanasia program
this is quite literally where our story ends sterilization for the nazis
wasn't enough they would be the ones to take negative eugenics to its next logical step
in 1939 the parents of a newborn disabled child applied for what they called a mercy killing up until then
religious views on the sanctity of life had stopped eugenicists short of actually ending the lives of
disabled people and such a thing was illegal in germany but the parents who were staunch nazis
petitioned hitler himself who ordered a doctor to go and decide whether the infant was indeed
disabled enough to die he was and when the nazis saw that there was no push back to the murder of this
baby they took it as a green light to roll out a program which had been years in the making
the child euthanasia program was a precursor to the mass murder of germany's disabled population
at first parents of disabled children were told that their kids were being taken into the care of
specialist hospitals only to either be immediately killed or first used for scientific research
in august 1939 the interior ministry stated that those subject to execution included children with
down syndrome any kind of difference in formation of spine limbs or head seizure conditions paralysis
and idiocy the mass murder of disabled people in nazi germany came in stages shortly after the first
children had been sent to die they expanded the program to include adults before also including
elderly and infirm people it was becoming difficult for the regime to keep up the pace of murdering people
even with the full and often enthusiastic cooperation of most family doctors who were in charge of referring
people for what they would call treatment five thousand children including hundreds of newborn babies
had been murdered by the 40s and it is they who are remembered here but the worst was
unbelievably yet to come by the end of 1939 the nazis sought a more effective way to cleanse the race
of useless eaters in january 1940 victor brack headed an operation at the brandenburg euthanasia center which
experimented with the use of bottled carbon monoxide gas for the use of efficient mass murder
it worked and the murder of disabled people via gas chamber became the standard across germany up to
300 000 disabled germans were murdered this way between 1940 and 1945 as part of what would later be known
as action t4 the technology designed for the elimination of germany's disabled and elderly population was later put to use in the death camps across europe
the ss officers who were in charge of the euthanasia program went on to run these death camps which saw the extermination of millions
from the holocaust encyclopedia the t4 program became the model for the mass murder of jews
roma and others in camps equipped with gas chambers that the nazis would open in 1941
1942 the program also served as a training ground for the ss members who manned these camps
in recent years there has been a resurgence of positive eugenics
the idea that gifted intelligent wealthy and successful people should have as many babies as
possible for the betterment of humanity but the other side of that coin is and will always be negative
eugenics if you think certain people are more worthy of passing on their genes than others
then it is a short step away from thinking that those others should not the conclusion of all eugenicist
thought is this the conclusion of all hierarchical thought is this that some kinds of people are simply
more deserving of life than others upholding hierarchical supremacist eugenicist ideals
even if you dress it up in new age tie-dye even if you dress it up as advocacy it all leads to the
same place here you might think that all this was a long time ago back when everything was in black and
white we don't think those things anymore we've changed we've evolved 1945 was 80 years ago there
are elderly people alive in germany today who might have lost siblings to this program and there are no
doubt countless people who lost cousins aunts uncles and neighbors 80 years is less than an average
lifetime people alive today remember the rounding up and disappearance of disabled people from their
communities and in case that's not enough to bring all of this crashing home in may of this year
2024 in munchengladbach here in germany a residential home for disabled people was attacked
a brick was thrown at a window and attached to the brick was the message euthanasia is the solution
the far right is growing in support and power all over europe and especially here in germany these
aren't yesterday's problems yesterday's ideas these are our problems and we don't fight fascism by
being unwitting circulators of their propaganda so stop it by the way if you are ever in berlin you should
check out this memorial and this unfortunately kind of a bit out of the way and as such
it's incredibly quiet it's located on the site of the original headquarters of the action t4 program
which is very fitting however it does mean that it misses most of the big tour groups it's situated
right next to the philharmonic orchestra house somewhat close to potsdamerplatz and right next to
tier carton which is behind me i highly recommend it if you're visiting the city
that you will cry but you will cry but some people like crying on vacation i don't know
how many years ago
if you don't work
crown opening, um, to let in the light and we're dropping right down into the heart space.
Thank you.
