Thank you for having me here to share some ideas with you.
Today, I'm going to talk about the role of bioelectric networks as the interface to a new kind of intelligence,
and in particular, the intelligence of the body.
And this has two major implications.
One is the biomedical aspects, and the other is that this is basically a model system for how to identify and communicate with diverse intelligences that are not like us.
And if you want to follow any of the details, download the papers, the data sets, the software, everything is here at this site.
And this is my personal blog about what I think all of these things mean.
So the main points that I would like to transmit to you today are these.
First, I'm going to tell you about bodies as a multi scale competency architecture,
that basically there is a kind of problem solving intelligence at every level from molecular networks to organs to collections of individual animals.
I'm going to claim that definitive regenerative medicine is going to require exploiting the collective intelligence of this material,
and the communication of anatomical goals to the agential material of life.
I'm going to show you that bioelectrical networks are a very tractable interface for top down control of anatomical outcomes.
We have tools now available to read and write the pattern memories into this proto cognitive medium,
which again is this idea that we're going to be able to re-specify what it is that cells want to build.
And this is going to give rise to and already has given rise to applications and birth defects,
regenerative repair of injury and cancer. And these things are now heading towards towards the clinic.
And the bigger context is that morphogenesis is basically an amazing model system for the study of the field of diverse intelligence,
learning to communicate with and relate to truly unconventional agents in novel embodiments.
So the first thing I want to start with is the end game. What do we think that where is this all going? You know, where's the where's the field of regenerative medicine going?
And I think that we can think about the the place that we want to get to with the notion of an anatomical compiler.
The idea is that someday you will be able to sit in front of a computer and draw the plant, animal, organ, biobot, whatever, draw any kind of a living construct.
And what the system will do is compile that anatomical description into a set of stimuli that would be given to individual cells to get them to build whatever you want them to build.
Now, if we had something like this, all of these medical problems would go away.
So birth defects, traumatic injury, cancer, aging, degenerative disease.
This would all be gone because you could communicate to cells how what you want them to build healthy new organs.
So all of these things are really limited by the problem of communication and information processing.
We do not know how to get cells to build specific structures.
And so this is very important. This device is not some kind of a 3D printer where we're going to micromanage the properties of cells and tissues.
It is a translator. It's a communications device.
And we need this because currently in the field, this is what we're very good at.
So figuring out which proteins and genes interact with which other proteins and genes.
So at the at the at the cellular level and the molecular level, we have a lot of information.
We're really a very long way away from being able to repair things like missing limbs and organs and having biomedical treatments that actually fix anything as opposed to suppress symptoms while you're taking a drug.
And that's because biomedicine, I think, and biology in general today is very much where computer science was in the 50s.
That basically you can see how she's reprogramming this computer by physically rewiring the hardware.
And so the idea is that modern molecular medicine is is is all about the hardware.
Everything is done at the molecular level.
All the exciting approaches are genome editing, protein engineering, pathway rewiring, all of these things were focused down into the into the lowest molecular hardware of life.
But we really don't understand the software, the physiological software that underlies information processing and biology.
And in order to understand it and to take advantage of it for for health applications, we need to understand the intelligence of the material that we're working with.
This is the kind of thing we're made of. This is a single cell.
OK, this is an organism known as a lacrimaria one cell, no brain, no nervous system, but extreme competency at its own tiny little agendas.
And we are all made of individual cells. And here, Jamie Davies and I talk about what it's like to engineer with this kind of material.
It's very different than engineering with with the metal and and plastic and things like that completely different set of tools needed to to engineer it with the material with agendas in particular, because it's not even that the cells are the where the intelligence starts.
Even below the cell level, the molecular pathways inside of individual cells are already capable of six different kinds of learning, including Pavlovian associative conditioning.
So we've we've shown this in a number of papers and we're using this to train individual cells and molecular pathways in the lab for things like drug conditioning and other other applications.
The material has intelligence at at at at every level. And I can show you a few a few examples.
Here's here's an example of problem solving at the transcriptional and physiological level.
So we have these flatworms, these planaria, you put them in a solution of barium in barium.
All the potassium channels are blocked to the head explodes.
Literally, they overnight they lose their heads because the cells are so unhappy about not being able to pass potassium.
But within within a short time, it regrows a new head and the new head is completely adapted to barium. No problem.
It grows just fine. And so what happened?
So we so we checked and it turns out that these barium adapted planaria expo express just a handful of genes, about a dozen genes differently than than standard planaria.
And what this means is that under a new stressor barium, which planaria has never seen before, these cells improvise a solution out of tens of thousands of possible genes.
They very quickly identify just a dozen genes to solve their problem.
And it's like it, you know, it's sort of like sitting in this in this nuclear reactor that's melting down.
There's a million buttons and you don't have time to randomly try all the buttons to see what happens.
You have to have some strategy for knowing what to do to solve your problem.
So so so cells are very good at taking physiological stressors and using the tools at their disposal, including their genetics.
Their genome is a tool to be used. They they they improvise a solution.
And this happens in many different kinds of spaces.
So in your body, you know, all the way from the molecular networks to the subcellular organelles to the tissues and so on.
All of these systems live in their own space and they are able to navigate that space adaptively to solve problems, to learn and and so on.
And as humans, we're pretty good at recognizing intelligence in three dimensional space that is of medium sized objects moving at medium speeds in 3D space like birds and primates and things like that.
But we're really we're really not very good at noticing intelligence when when the body is very large or very small or very fast or very slow.
Our own evolutionary firmware kind of limits what what we natively can see.
And biology, however, uses all of these other spaces.
It navigates the space of transcriptional space, the space of physiological states, the space of possible anatomical states.
This is the one we're going to talk about today, the most anatomical morphous space.
So I'm I'm emphasizing the idea of biology not as a not as a set of mechanical of open loop processes, but actually as systems that are primarily navigation systems that are moving around in various spaces and trying to achieve specific states within those spaces.
Aka they have goals and they have different competencies of reaching those goals.
And this is this is the journey that we all took.
We all started life as a little unfertilized oocyte.
So a quiescent little blob of chemicals and then slowly, gradually we become one of these things or maybe even something like this.
So incredible complexity.
But but you'll note that in in in development, there is no magic time point at which we suddenly become a mind.
OK, this is slow and gradual.
It's it's not an issue of categories of dead of of of dumb matter versus intelligent beings.
This this intelligence is baked in at the very bottom into the molecular networks that underlie even cells.
And it's a gradual process of scaling up, improving the expanding the cognitive light cone, projecting it into new spaces as as you leave the domain of physics and chemistry.
And you enter eventually the domain of behavior science, psychiatry, psychoanalysis and so on.
And what what happens is that these these embryos self-organize and it's interesting to ask how many individuals are within a single embryo and what is an embryo?
The reason that you we call we look at this.
So so here's an embryonic blasted or maybe 100000 cells at this point.
The reason we call this an embryo and not just a pile of cells is because of alignment, both both physical alignment, but more importantly, teleological alignment.
These cells are all committed to the same goal, the same story of what they should be doing, where they should be going in anatomical morphous space.
An embryo is basically a shared world model.
That's really what it is that convinces all of the cells that they're going to work together to one particular outcome.
But if we make scratches in this in this blasted room, each of these each of these islands actually becomes its own embryo.
This has been known for a really long time that all of these cells will self-organize and eventually you will get twins, triplets and so on.
So the question of how many individuals, how many minds can emerge out of this blasted room is not fixed by the genetics.
It is a dynamic thing, just like body self-organized out of an excitable medium.
They each they each acquire the cognition that that is that is needed to navigate this world.
And it can be anywhere from zero to probably half a dozen or more distinct individuals that can form out of this one blasted room.
And this raises all kinds of interesting questions about the maximum carrying capacity, like how many human minds can actually be produced out of a single out of a single embryo.
And it also links to fascinating issues, which I don't have time to discuss here of the same kind of thing in in cognition.
In other words, split brain patients, dissociative identity disorders and how many different minds can inhabit the same brain.
That's basically the same question is here. So so this really this the developmental biology is really at the very center of not only is it is it a requirement to understand it for things like regenerative medicine, but also deep questions of of of mind.
You know, what are we where that we come from all of this, this is this is where it has its root in the self organization of the material substrate of life and mind.
So these anatomies, we need to understand where they come from.
Here's a cross section through a human torso. You could see amazing detail.
Everything is in the right place, you know, next to the right thing, the right size and shape.
And we start here. We start as a bag of embryonic blastomers.
Where is this shape coming from? How do the cells know what to do?
I mean, a lot of people will immediately say the genome, but we can read genomes.
Now, we know that the genome doesn't directly say anything about any of this.
The genome specifies proteins, the tiny molecular hardware that every cell gets to have.
And in fact, we wrote we wrote this is this this paper recently talking about what what what is the genome actually?
And so so so the genome doesn't specify this any more than the termite genome specifies directly the structure of their nest or the spider genome will tell you what the shape of the
of the spider web is going to be. This is all these are all software outputs.
The genome specifies the hardware. So so we need to understand how do how does that software work?
How do cells know what to make and when to stop?
If something is missing or damaged, how do we repair it?
And as you'll see at the end of this at the end of this talk, as engineers, we'd also like to ask what's the what are the limits of plasticity?
What else can the cells build the exact same cells with the same genome?
What else can be can can they be induced to build?
OK, and so so I think the answer to to all of these questions lies directly through the concept of intelligence.
What I mean by intelligence is is this it's a William James's definition.
It's the ability to reach the same goal by different means.
It's very cybernetic definition. It doesn't say you have to have a brain.
It doesn't say what kind of goals they are. They don't have to be in three dimensional space and they can be in all of these all of these other kind of spaces.
But it's the degree of ingenuity you have to reach your goal state when things change and from novel circumstances.
And so so let's look at that next. What kind of collective intelligence do cellular swarms deploy?
And I call it a collective intelligence because we are all collective intelligences.
In fact, all intelligence is collective intelligence because it's made of parts.
So so we are made of many different cell types, including neurons.
And we know things that our individual cells don't know because of the process of collective intelligence and the cognitive glue that binds them together and aligns them towards a single world model and a self model.
And I'll show you that the bioelectricity is is one of those very important cognitive glues.
So so so let's talk about morphogenetic intelligence. First of all, we know that development is very reliable.
So so most of the time from an embryonic state, you get to exactly the species specific target morphology.
But this is really important. This is not why I call it intelligence.
It is not because it's reliable. It is not because there's an increase in complexity.
Those things are very cheap. It's really easy to have systems that do that, that reliably have some kind of outcome and and raise complexity while they're doing it.
That's that's not why I'm calling it intelligence. Remember, intelligence is the ability to meet your goal when things change.
So the first thing we know is that we can cut embryos into pieces and you don't get half embryos.
You get perfectly normal monozygotic twins and triplets and and and so on.
And so we know that embryos can navigate that anatomical space and reach this ensemble of goal states, despite all kinds of perturbations, despite all kinds of local minima.
And when you when you start them in different positions, they will do what's needed to to move through that space and get where they're going.
So now so now we're getting somewhere. This is this is a system that can get to the same outcome from different starting positions.
In fact, some systems can do it throughout their life. So this is a an axolotl and this amphibian regenerates its eyes, its jaws, its limbs, its spinal cord portions of the brain and heart.
And here you can see what happens if if it's amputated anywhere along the length of this appendage, the cells immediately can tell that something's different.
They've been deviated from their point in morphe space from their goal state.
They will grow very quickly. They will make the correct pattern and then they stop.
When do they stop? They stop when the correct salamander or other animal limb has been produced.
And so this is an example of anatomical homeostasis. It's a system that has a goal state.
When you deviate it from that goal state, it will do its best to get back to that goal state.
It reduces the error between where where it is and where it wants to be.
And it knows where it wants to be, because once it gets there, then everything stops remodeling and growth stops.
Now now notice that this is not just about repair and it's not just about damage.
It's a much more interesting system. So so so if you take a if you take a tail from a from an amphibian and graft it onto the flank,
what you will see over time is that it actually transforms into a limb and that cells at the end of the tail,
which are locally perfectly fine, their tail and cells sitting at the tip of a tail, but they become fingers.
This whole thing remodels. It's a non local event.
There's nothing wrong up here, but all of them remodel because it it seeks to be within the correct overall morphology
with the rest of the animal and being a tail in the flank is not it.
And so, again, you have the situation where the home anatomical homeostasis, where the local order here obeys a global plan.
This is really critical in all cognitive systems. The whole point is to guide the parts towards large scale goals that they don't know anything about.
OK, so it's a it's a it's a kind of a top down control system.
And by the way, this this regeneration is not just for so-called lower animals.
Mammals can do it somewhat. So humans regenerate their liver.
Even the ancient Greeks knew that I have no idea how they knew that, but they did deer every year.
They regenerate huge amounts of bone innervation vasculature as they as they regrow.
So they can grow a centimeter and a half of new bone per day.
It's an amazingly rapid process. Actually, even human children below a certain age tend to regenerate fingertips.
So if they lose a fingertip, you really don't need to do anything.
They will they will actually regenerate and often have a very good cosmetic outcome.
So we have a little bit of this this property and our goal is to is to enhance this for biomedicine.
Now, I've shown you already a couple of examples of this intelligence. This is this is perhaps my my favorite.
It's the idea that living things are have to respond not only to external perturbations.
So that means injury and things like that, but they also can't trust their internal parts.
OK, and over time, that's and that's for two reasons.
Biology uses a an unreliable medium as a cell.
You never know how many copies of any molecule you actually have or, you know, whether your genes have been mutated through through lineages or whatever.
So here's here's my favorite example. This is a cross section through a kidney tubule in the newt.
So normally eight to ten cells work together to form this this kind of structure with a lumen in the middle.
And one thing you can do is you can make newts with extra copies of their genetic material.
If you do that, the nuclei get bigger, the cells get bigger to accommodate, but the newt stays the same size.
And you say, well, how can that be? Well, that's because fewer cells are bigger, but fewer cells will make exactly the same structure.
And so so so first of all, the first amazing thing is that it doesn't matter how many copies of your genetic material you have.
You have extra instructions. It doesn't matter. You still get a normal newt.
If your cells are bigger, doesn't matter how the cell the size of the organ adjusts to the cell size.
And then the most amazing thing happens when you make truly gigantic cells.
I think these are like six and polyploid newts or something when the cell gets so big that that even once that only one cell will fit.
It bends around itself, leaves a hole in the middle and gives you the same large scale structure.
So on the one hand, this is this is remarkable because this is a kind of top down causation.
That is that is the hallmark of any IQ test.
So the idea is in the service of your goal.
So making this kind of structure, you pick different molecular mechanisms, cell to cell communication, cytoskeletal bending.
In this case, you use different mechanisms at your disposal to solve the problem.
This is how this is a standard IQ test stuff.
You're given a set of objects and said this is these are the tools you have.
Now try to make something happen out of these tools creatively.
So so this is this is a this is a remarkable example of creative problem solving, because think of think of what this means.
If you're if you're an embryo coming into the world, what can you count on?
You can't really count on your environment.
Who knows what's going to happen there?
You can't even count on your own parts.
You don't know how many copies of your genome you're going to have.
You don't know how big your cells are going to be.
You don't know how many cells you have.
You have to get the job done regardless.
So this is this is one of those examples of the amazing plasticity of of the living material to reach its goals.
And then later in this talk, I'm going to show you what it does when those goals are completely unreachable.
What it does is find new goals.
But I'll show you that.
But in the meantime, it's able to it's able to reach reach its goals by reusing the tools that already
has in novel ways.
And so we can ask, how is all this happening?
How are cells cooperating and coordinating together to solve these problems and to reach goal states?
What what could it mean mechanistically for a set of cells to have a goal and try to meet it?
Well, we have an example of this in neuroscience.
We already know that as a as a as a neural brainy organism, you have a set of cells that can keep goals and pursue them.
And that's your brain.
So the way that works is there's this there's this hardware, which is basically a network of cells that have a little proteins in their in their membrane called ion channels.
They use ions like potassium, sodium and so on to establish a voltage gradient between inside and outside.
And that gradient can or sometimes is not propagated to their neighbors through these electrical synapses known as gap junctions.
So that's that's the network.
That's the hardware.
The software is this amazing electrophysiology.
Here it is in a living zebrafish brain that underlies all the decision making of the system.
And there's this project of neural decoding where neuroscientists hope that by by recording and then decoding the electrophysiological activity, they will have access to interpreting the memories, the preferences, the goals, the all of the cognitive aspects of the of the animal or the human patient.
In fact, are actually encoded in this electrophysiology. Well, it turns out that evolution discovered this amazing system long before brains came on the scene.
Every cell of your body has ion channels. Most of them have gap junctions to their neighbors.
And we can do if we can and have done for now some years, try try the same project of decoding the electrophysiology of your body to understand what the somatic intelligence is thinking about.
We know what your neural intelligence thinks about in animals that thinks about moving them through three dimensional space, but your bioelectric networks of the rest of your body, which were discovered around the time of bacterial biofilms.
They are incredibly ancient evolution. What they think about is how to move the configuration of your body through anatomical space.
And so we've developed some tools first voltage sensitive fluorescent dye imaging to be able to read and write these or to to detect changes in these electrical properties of cells.
So the idea is that we can we can scan here's an early frog embryo here are some cells in the dish making decisions as to whether they're going to join this mass or crawl off the colors represent voltage.
OK, so so the and these are not models. These are real. This is real data.
We're able to now watch all the conversations that cells are having with each other and all the electrical patterns that that occur.
We do a lot of computer simulations. So connected to the molecular biology of which channels and pumps are expressed the the quantitative simulation at the tissue level and then connecting it to to ideas.
And for example, machine learning such as pattern completion or regeneration where you can see here's what the network remembers.
And when parts are missing, how can it restore that memory?
Let me show you a couple of specific patterns. This is what we call the electric face.
So this is an early frog embryo putting its face together in time lapse.
And what you can see here and again, the color, the gray scale is different levels of voltage.
What you see here is there's there's a lot going on, but this is one frame.
So even before the genes turn on to regionalize the face, you already have a subtle scaffold, a pre pattern, an energetic pre pattern to the anatomy that says here's where the eye is going to be.
Here's where the mouth is going to be. Here are the placodes.
This is this tissue already knows what a frog face looks like.
And if you change this pattern, then everything, everything downstream gene expression anatomy will follow.
It's really exciting. This this this improvements in the voltage imaging have been amazing when when this and I like this as a kind of as an example.
So so in astronomy in 90 1996, this is what we had for Pluto.
This is the best image we had for Pluto in 96 and things got better by 2002.
It looked like this. But by 2017, it looked like this. This is remarkable, right?
This is Pluto at the edge of our solar system. And this imaging is the same thing.
This is what an eye spot looked like in 2012. Now we have imaging that looks like this where we can see individual cells.
We can we can track the voltage and now we can see the incredible complexity of the data that are actually that are actually being processed by these tissues.
But tracking these patterns is not sufficient. You need to be able to change them.
It's not just about characterizing what happens. You need to be able to write the information in.
And so the way we do that. Now, this is very important. We use no applied fields.
OK, so there are no waves, frequencies, electromagnetic radiation, no magnets, nothing, no electrodes, nothing like that.
What we do instead is we manipulate the interface that cells are normally using to control each other.
In other words, here are the electrical synapses between cells and we can open and close them.
And then here are the actual ion channels that set the voltage states.
And again, we can open and close them using drugs, using optogenetics, using where you we can we can introduce some mutant channels that have different properties.
So basically, we steal all the tools of neuroscience because this is fundamentally the same problem.
And one of my arguments is that neuroscience is not about neurons at all.
It's about the scaling of intelligence from cells to larger, larger collectives and all of the tools of neuroscience, both the bench tools than the techniques and also the concepts.
Everything from active inference, perceptual by stability, memory models, all of it is actually can be remapped onto onto developmental biology.
It all it all works the same way, because what evolution did in creating the neural all these neural phenomena that we're used to is a sped up bioelectrical signal.
So instead of a minutes of things now in the brain, take milliseconds and basically projected into a new space instead of in addition to navigating anatomical space.
Once you have nerve and muscle, you can navigate three dimensional space.
But everything else is basically the same. And so so now now it's time for me to show you what you can actually do with this, because what I claim is that this is this this this bioelectrical interface in this way of thinking about what's going on.
Thinking of the bioelectrical signaling as the cognitive glue that binds individual cells towards larger purpose is is is is an is an amazingly useful interface to make some changes that are that are important for medicine.
I'm going to show you those. So first of all, let's let's think about the cognitive light cone of of the system.
So here's an individual cell and individual cells have little tiny cognitive light cones.
The cognitive light cone is the defined as is the size of the largest goal that the system can have.
That's that's my definition for when I set up that concept was to was to capture this this idea that that the kinds of goals you can have determine your level of of intelligence.
And so it these kinds of systems only care about metabolic states and physiological states in a tiny little region.
They have a little bit of memory, a little bit of anticipation, actually, potential.
But but it's very small, both in space and time. That cone is very small.
But during evolution and during development, they join networks and networks have a huge compared to these guys, have a huge cognitive light cone.
For example, the goal of this system is to remain this limb. If you try to deviate it, it will try to get back there.
That's how you know it's a goal, because when you deviate the system, it tries to come back.
And what they're working on, whereas this this system where these cells work on tiny little goals, this thing is working on a giant construction project.
It's immense. It's a it's a it's an entire limb.
No individual cell knows what a finger is or how many fingers you're supposed to have.
Individual cells don't know that, but the collective certainly does.
And now they can they can, whereas this cell was adaptively trying to reach its local goals.
This system adaptively reaches this this giant goal.
So so one thing we can one thing we can think about is the scaling and the changes of the size of that cognitive light cone.
But it can also shrink. So this is glioblastoma.
This is what happens when individual cells disconnect from that electrical network.
They can no longer remember this big goal they were working on.
They go back to their ancient unicellular lifestyle, which is to be an amoeba in a in the rest of the body, just environment.
So what happens, for example, in the body?
And this is this is the tadpole system.
So these are frog frog larvae.
When we inject human oncogenes, they get tumors.
OK, so here they are. The tumors start to metastasize.
But but at very early stages, you can already tell with the voltage that you can already tell where the tumors going to be, because here's where the cells are disconnecting from the network and establishing their own aberrant voltage gradients, because as far as they're concerned, they're just amoebas.
And this is just external environment that that boundary between self and world instead of being this giant self has now shrunk for these cells.
Now, tiny little little cells. And so and so this is OK, this is a diagnostic modality, of course.
And so we're working on a device like this where the surgeons will be able to look down during the during the operation and actually using voltage dyes actually see where the margins of the tumor are and where there's any rogue cells.
So they know exactly what what they can cut. And this is this is this is an artist's rendition of a thing we're working on.
But what's what's even more important than just diagnostics is the idea that you can intervene here.
And so what we did is we said, OK, what if we we don't we don't kill the cells?
We don't we don't try to fix the the the the oncoprotein or anything like that.
All we're going to do is reconnect them, forcibly reconnect them to the rest of the network.
So the oncogene is telling you to disconnect and go be an amoeba.
We are just going to tell you to connect. We're not going to tell you what to do.
We're not going to repair the gene. We're just going to tell you to connect.
And the way we do that is by injecting ion channel RNA into cells that that force the cell voltage to be such that the gap junctions are open and they're connected.
And this is an example of what you see here in the full data set is in a couple of a few actually onco target papers where this is this is where the oncoprotein is.
You can see we labeled it in red fluorescence. It's very strong.
In fact, it's everywhere. This is the same animal. There's no tumor, even though even though the oncoprotein that normally makes tumors is here strongly.
There's no tumor because it's not the genetics that drives. It's not the hardware that determines the outcome. It's the software.
And when these cells are connected into a into a network, the network remembers how to make nice muscle, nice skin, all the things it's supposed to make.
It's not going to make it. It's not going to make a tumor.
So what we're doing now is trying to develop a computational platform where you can actually choose various tissues, whether cancer or normal.
That enables us to know what channels and pumps exist. So those are your targets for intervention.
And then there's a computational platform here that we're working on and you can start playing with it here.
There's a computational platform that will tell you if you want to change the state from this to this, which ion channels do you need to open and close?
OK, and so that's there's a there's a this is a platform for searching this this thing we call it the electroceutical design environment.
And the idea is that you'll be able to exploit the many, many ion channel drugs, something like 20 percent of all drugs are ion channel drugs.
So this is an incredible toolkit of electroceuticals that that we're going to deploy to try to reinflate that cognitive light cone as a as a therapeutic.
And in particular, this view of cancer is literally a dissociative identity disorder, right?
Cancer is a dissociative identity disorder of the somatic intelligence.
And you can reintegrate if you if you understand the physiology, the electrophysiology, and you're able to bind the cells back into a back into a collective.
And this is some of our some of our first work on using this in in mammalian cells.
And this this is this is an example of glioblastoma and using ident identifying electroceuticals that actually normalize the cells and make them be be quite quite normal.
So, OK, so what I've showed you so for the first example I've showed you is that we understand the scaling of the cognitive light cone.
We understand what the electrical networks are doing. We can start to reset that boundary and that leads to a novel therapeutic for cancer.
Now I want to talk about birth defects. So so there are many, many ways to screw up embryonic development that the cells cannot overcome.
So nicotine, for example, alcohol, many different things. And so you can see this is a frog tadpole head.
Here's the forebrain, midbrain and hindbrain. The eyes are out here and you can see that if it's exposed to certain teratogens, there are defects.
So so the brain, the the the the the brain structures is messed up.
The eyes are connected to the forebrain instead of being out here. Lots of problems.
And so we created a computational model that asks the question, what's going on with the bioelectric pre pattern in these cases?
And can we given when the pattern is incorrect, how how can we correct it?
What what channels and pumps can we target to go back to the correct bioelectrical patterns?
This is why it's important to understand the tissue level rules governing the transition of electrical states.
These are not single cell phenomena. These are large scale phenomena.
So when you when we did that, the model did something something quite amazing.
It predicted this particular channel, this HCN2 channel as a kind of sharpening filter that really it predicted would repair the bioelectric pattern that was that that went wrong in these in these kinds of embryos.
And I'm going to show you just what I think is the most impressive
target out of all of the papers on this that we had, which is the mutation of this notch gene.
So notch is a very important neurogenesis gene.
If you mutated here instead of this forebrain, midbrain, hindbrain here, the notch, the animals bearing the notch mutation, it's dominant.
There's no forebrain. The midbrain and hindbrain are a bubble filled with water.
They have no behavior. They do. They do nothing.
They just lay there. And what we found is that if we did what the model predicts, which is to
crank up this HCN2 channel, in fact, everything goes back to normal.
The brain shape, the brain gene expression and even behavior.
We tested their learning rate and they learn at the same rate as controls.
Everything goes back to normal, even though they still have this notch mutation.
So this is an example of correcting in software using the physiological modulation of the decision making of cells of how to build a brain can override genetic defects.
And I'm not saying that will be true in every case, but in some cases you can fix certain kinds of hardware defects in software by communicating new goals.
Right. So you're going to build this instead of this to the to the cellular collective.
And our model is now to the point where it can actually suggest very specific targets.
And we used we used to anti-epileptics that are already in human use for this new purpose to open these HCN2 channels and induce this kind of repair.
So so the thing is, so understand what we're trying to do here is by by using this electrical interface, by opening and closing specific channels, we're trying to transmit specific goal states to the cells.
OK, so that we can control what they built. And you can see here, it's very interesting how certain kinds of messages can can can completely alter cell decision making.
So so so all. So here are cells. The color represents voltage.
And you can see here that this cell is quite depolarized until it touches this cell and it only takes a tiny little touch.
And look, it turns completely into this into the it acquires the same voltage state as these guys from the tiniest little contact.
And so here you can see it. So here it is. It's blue. It's crawling along.
Now, here's going to make it just that's a tiny little touch. And it's convinced it's already it already.
It acquired the same voltage state as the rest and it joined the collective.
These electrical signals are extremely powerful and we need to learn from these cells how to make signals that are that convincing so that we can every single time get the get the response we want.
What kind of response might we want? Well, here's an example.
If we I showed you in that electric face, there's a particular voltage spot that that says make an eye here.
That's that's what that says. It indicates the position of the eye.
So we asked, what if we reproduce that same voltage state somewhere else in the animal?
So so we took RNA encoding a particular potassium channel, which will induce that voltage state, injected it into cells, which will be part of the gut or the tail or somewhere else.
And sure enough, what they do, the cells get the message.
They make an eye. These eyes can have all the same lens, right?
The optic nerve, all the same stuff that that they're supposed to keep in mind.
This is extremely modular, meaning that we don't tell we don't know how to make an eye.
We don't tell the cells what to do, where the stem cells go, what genes to turn on off.
They already know all of that. All we need to do is give them a very high level message that that high level subroutine call that says make an eye.
And if we're convincing, they will take up the message and they will not only make an eye, but actually, if you only inject a few cells.
So this is a lens sitting out in the tail somewhere of a tadpole.
The blue ones are the ones we actually injected.
What they do is they recruit all their neighbors because it's not enough of them to make a good to make a good eye.
They they recruit all these other cells were never injected by us.
It's a it's a secondary induction.
So once you convince these cells that they need to make an eye, they go ahead and convince all the other cells that they should participate with them.
But when I say convince, I mean that quite literally, because in this state, in this in this kind of system, there is a battle of world views.
Literally, there is a battle of models of what the future should look like, because if you do this at an early stage, you will see a number of ectopic eye spots.
Each one of these blue things is the expression of Rick's one, which is a an early eye marker.
And so so you can you look at the summary and say, oh, we're going to have like at least three ectopic eyes, you know, maybe, maybe, maybe more.
But in the end, you often only get one.
What happened? Or in fact, none. What happened?
It's because while our signal is saying BNI, the surrounding cells, they have a cancer suppression mechanism, which says if you are next to a cell which has some kind of weird voltage that's not like you try to convince it to to have the normal voltage.
In other words, wipe out or resist what we are trying to do.
And I showed you a minute ago how cells do that by by touching and converting the voltage of the neighboring cells.
So what's happening here is really a battle of two two world views.
Should we be an eye or should we be skin and sometimes or or gut or whatever?
And sometimes the one wins, sometimes the other wins.
And we're still only at the early stages of understanding what it is that makes certain messages more convincing to these cells.
Why do some patterns win in some cases?
And this also, of course, is important for understanding why do we get cancer in certain scenarios and others.
OK, so moving on, what I'm showing you is that understanding these these these kinds of the dynamics of the bioelectric patterns is a is a way to do things like create whole organs, specify a complete eye, for example, where we actually don't know how to micromanage that process.
So we're moving this forward into regenerative medicine of other structures like appendages.
So here's a frog, unlike axolotls, frogs do not regenerate their legs.
So here, 45 days later, there's basically there's basically nothing.
But with a cocktail that we've designed that is applied for the first day within 45 days, you already get some toes.
You've got a toenail here. So the anterior most structures early on, all of the pro regenerative genes like MSX one are turned on.
You can see this leg is touch sensitive and motile.
So it's functional and actually a pretty respectable leg by the time it's done.
So the amazing thing here is that we only intervene for 24 hours.
OK, the way the way this works is you do the amputation, then you put a wearable bioreactor that contains some some ion channel modulating chemical compounds.
And that only lasts 24 hours. And then you get a year and a half of leg growth here, a year and a half.
During that time, we don't touch it at all. The idea is not to micromanage it.
This is not about scaffolds or putting specific, you know, 3D printing cells or we're working with stem cells.
It's not about any of that. It's about convincing the cells at the very beginning in the first 24 hours.
You're going to go down the leg path versus you're going to go down the scarring path and that's it.
Then you leave it alone because it's a competent system that navigates that space on its own.
We don't need to tell it how to do that already knows how to do that.
So so this is what we're interested in is developing triggers for these kind of very complex applications.
And so I have to do a disclosure here because we are Dave Kaplan and I are co-founders of this company called Morphosuticals, which is now moving this to to mammals and hopefully eventually to to patients.
And so so these bioelectrical signals are not only binding individual individual cells into a larger scale collective, but they are active.
They are active patterns in themselves.
So if you see here, there's a there's a wide range of of phenomena.
So each one of these things is a separate embryo.
It's not a single cell. It's a separate embryo.
And so you can see here there are patterns that go between embryos.
So when I poke this one, these guys find out about it because of this wave.
And within an embryo, there are amazing phenomenon of all different kinds of waves.
And, you know, you can you can see here it looks like certain kinds of cellular automata and so on.
These patterns themselves are the targets of intervention.
That is, we are not just seeking to communicate with the cells, the physical agents.
We're actually seeking to communicate with the patterns.
So the patterns themselves that move through the tissue themselves have computational capacity.
And like William James also said, thoughts are thinkers as well, too. Right.
So so patterns within media are also agents that can do computation and that we need to be able to target.
And I think I think in general, this is what the future.
And so I'm just going to wrap up here in a couple of minutes.
This is what I think the future looks like of biomedicine.
There are two major groups of interventions.
Everything up until now has been these kind of bottom up things.
They're all things that target the hardware and hope that you eventually get the correct system level response.
But there's also this amazing emerging field of top down approaches, including training cells and tissues.
I haven't had a chance to talk about that this time in all kinds of electroceuticals,
which are a special category of morphocyticals, which is again interventions that don't try to micromanage the system,
but actually try to communicate and collaborate with the with the intelligence and the problem solving navigational capacity of the systems that are all scaled.
And that's why I think future medicine is going to look a lot more like a kind of somatic psychiatry, not chemistry.
And bioelectricity is not the only layer, but it's a great layer to to to start to understand this.
And all of that is described in detail here.
So so what we're doing now to to try to make this even even easier is to to you to use AI and other tools to begin to communicate with all the different layers.
So the bioelectric layer goes all the way from subcellular components all the way up through the mind of the patient.
And at every level, there's new there are there are new agents to communicate with.
And we are developing AI tools to do that as well as a robotic platform.
And this is this is work with Josh Bongard's lab at UVM and also a Don Ingers group at the Vis Institute to create a platform where we can do a where where robotics,
actual laboratory robotics can be driven by AI to try to improve our ability to communicate with these things.
And the last thing I want to show you is I just want to bring this back to where where we started.
This is all fundamentally not about regenerative medicine.
The medical applications are, you know, a really exciting outcome.
But but they're just an application of a much, much deeper question.
A deeper question is what what what kind of minds can be embodied in the physical world?
And what is the spectrum of of of intelligence that exists in unconventional embodiments?
So we know that there's a smooth gradient both in evolution and development from single cells to modern humans.
But of course, there's another spectrum, too, with technological changes and biological changes.
And one can ask, you know, these so far I've shown you I've shown you ways to modify.
And actually, I haven't talked about the planaria, but we have these flatworms and we can make them have two heads or, in fact, heads of other species.
You can make all kinds of changes.
But all of these things, extra eyes, extra heads, extra limbs, all of these things are components that are naturally evolved.
In other words, they exist in other animals.
What happens when when we start to make beings like like these that have never existed before, where you can't blame evolution for as an answer to why do they have certain behaviors in certain forms?
And so I want to introduce you quickly to a new life form that's made by existing cells, but has a completely different embodiment.
We call these anthrobots. If I didn't tell you what this was, you might think this is some kind of a primitive organism that we found at the bottom of a lake somewhere.
If you were to sequence it, you would find out that this is 100 percent homo sapiens.
These are completely normal, unedited human tracheal, adult, adult, not embryonic, adult tracheal epithelial cells that self assemble and form this little self motile thing that has a structure and behavior that's not like any of our human developmental sequence.
This is this is what they look like. They can move around because they have little hairs called cilia on their outer surface.
They have four different behavior types. You can draw an ethogram of the transition probabilities.
So you can study them like any other behaving animal. If you look at their gene expression, over 9000 genes are differentially expressed compared to their tissue of origin.
About half the genome is now different. We haven't done anything to the DNA. There are no synthetic circuits here.
There are no genomic editing, no nanomaterials, no weird drugs. They do this because they have a new lifestyle.
They change their their gene expression because they have a completely different lifestyle, which again gets back to the question we started with, which is, you know, in producing genomes, evolution does not make fixed solutions for fixed environments.
What it makes are problem solving agents that have the ability to interpret the information they have, including genetic information in whatever way is is most adaptive at the time.
And they have amazing capabilities such as if you make human cells, if you played human neural cells in the dish and then you take a scalpel, you put a big scratch through it.
So this is this is a neural wound. The anthrobots will settle down.
They'll make this like super bot cluster thing and you can see what they do.
If you lift it up, they start healing the gap.
OK, so who would have thought that your tracheal epithelial cells, which sit there quietly in your airway for decades, are able to have a different life as the self motile little creature.
And by the way, it knows how to fix neural wounds.
And we're hoping that this is a new kind of personalized therapeutic, meaning that you can use this inside your body.
You don't need immune suppression.
It will be your own cells with a billion years of history of knowing what the inflammation is, what infection is, what cancer is much more sophisticated than any nanobot that we can build.
But also, right, so it's a it's a biomedical personalized intervention, but also it is a it is a window on plasticity and it's a exploration tool for understanding what patterns are available that have never been selected for in evolution.
There's never been any answer about there's never been selection to be a good answer.
So I want to end with with this concept, this idea that when you know when Darwin said endless forms most beautiful, he was thinking about the naturally evolved forms on Earth, which are a tiny corner of this incredible possibility space of bodies and minds because because of that plasticity of life, the ability of living material to improvise solutions every time for a new and pretty much any combination of
evolved material engineered material and software is some kind of a viable system cyborgs and hybrids and chimeras of all kinds that can make use of patterns that come from wherever the rules of mathematics come from.
It's not in the physical world. It's a it's a different set of patterns.
And and and we are going to have to adapt to our ethical frameworks to a new kind of synth biosis with beings that are not like us.
And all of the biomedical stuff I showed you and reprogramming the goals of the cellular collective and all of that are basically just an example.
They're an early form of trying to detect and trying to communicate with an intelligence that's not like ours, because if we can't handle doing that with our own body cells,
the chance that we're going to be able to do it with a wide variety of, first of all, forthcoming beings with whom we are going to share our world in terms of never mind just the AIs, but but all of the the composite beings, you know, the cyborgs and everything.
Or, of course, alien life, you know, we're not ready for any of that if we can't even communicate with our own body cells.
So that's it. I'll stop here and just summarize what we are looking for is an improved communication and collaboration with the agential material of life.
Definitive regenerative medicine is not a problem of genetics or biochemistry.
It's actually a branch of I think it's a branch of cognitive science and of computer science or information science.
Bioelectricity is the interface to be able to rewrite the goal states of these of these basal intelligences.
We can reset the borders. Now I showed you that in the cancer examples, and we can take advantage of the problem solving competencies of cells and tissues.
We are just scratching the surface here.
The plasticity of that cellular intelligence can lead to tools like Anthrobots for personalized interventions.
But really, bioengineering gives us amazing opportunities for using bioelectricity and other modalities beyond repair.
So we're talking about augmentation, freedom of embodiment, those kinds of things.
And fundamentally, that communication with a collective intelligence of cells that lives and functions and exerts its intelligence.
And MorphaSpace is a model system for this emerging new field.
So I'll just thank the postdocs and the students who did all the work that I showed you today, our many amazing collaborators, our various funders over the years that have supported different aspects of our work.
Here's the disclosures. There are three companies that have spun off from some of the things that I've showed you today.
And the most thanks go to the model systems because they do all the hard work and they're the ones who teach us about all this stuff.
So I will stop here. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
