Hi, everyone. While they're getting the screen sharing set up, just to say thank you so much
for making the opportunity for me to speak to you remotely. I wish I was there in person,
but I have some things I'd love to talk to you about. So what I'd love to do today is to talk
about a little bit of our work. And in 20 minutes, I can only sort of give you the highlights of some
things that I think are relevant. What I'm interested in is embodied minds, and in particular,
embodied minds beyond the ones that are really easy for us to recognize. As a model system, we use
the collective intelligence of cells as they navigate the space of anatomical possibilities.
And this gives us the ability to ask questions in a very serious empirical way to ask questions about
what does the mind of the body think about? How do we communicate with it? How can we reset some of
its priors and its beliefs and so on? And this gives rise to a very practical research program
in regenerative medicine of birth defects, injury, cancer, and so on. There's a few main points which
are related to Ian's work. And I'm delighted to be able to talk about these things in this context.
So you'll see these crop up during the talk. But fundamentally, what I do is diverse intelligence
research. And one of the things I'd like to introduce to start off is this old painting.
This is Adam naming the animals in the Garden of Eden. And one of the interesting things about this
old story is that it was Adam that had to name the animals. It wasn't God or the angels. It was Adam
that had to do it. And so we wonder why was it on him to name the animals? And I think what's
interesting here is that in many traditions, discovering the name of something or naming
something means that you've understood its true nature, you've discovered its inner nature. And
I think this is exactly what we're doing, because it's going to become very important to understand
the true nature of all kinds of beings beyond what is shown here and what's conventionally thought
about. And so my framework is, the goal of it is to recognize and learn to ethically relate to
all kinds of diverse intelligences. And that includes, of course, us and various animals that
are easy for us to recognize. We're also all sorts of weird creatures, you know, colonial organisms and
swarms, synthetic biology, so engineered new life forms, chimeric life forms, things like cyborgs and
hybrids and various other beings that are going to be with us in the next few decades, starting off
with humans, with various augmented technology and radiating out from there, and eventually maybe
even truly alien life. And I think that, you know, it might be a little shocking to see some of these
things in the same list as some of these things. But I think we really have to take seriously the
humility of not assuming that we understand what kinds of embodiments of various aspects of the
ineffable can take. And so my point here is not to kind of neglect the things that make us special,
but actually to really understand what other embodiments that can take. And of course, I'm not
the first person to think about these things. So Rosenbluth, Wiener and Bigelow tried for this kind
of scale so that you can put on the same on the same kind of continuum, all kinds of different
degrees of agency and so on. And what I'm interested in is a framework that moves experimental work
forward, so to new capabilities, and also enables better ethical frameworks that are going to avoid
some of the lapses that I'm sure will result from naive and simplistic ways of trying to make a
distinction between all of these different things. So this idea of, you know, making distinctions
between agents in terms of where they come from, so where they evolved in a random search process of
evolution, where they engineered by human engineers, or somewhere in between, or a combination. Let's
look at where we actually come from. So this is the journey that each of us takes. We were all,
quote unquote, just physics at some point. And I hate that phrase, but people use it a lot. So
we all begin life as a, as an unfertilized oocyte, a little blob of chemistry, and slowly,
gradually, with no particular bright line of, you know, there's no, the developmental biology gives
you no specific point at which something, something unique happens to turn this process into something
like this, or one of these other amazing creatures. So we all, we all have made this, this journey. And
if you look inside any one of these things, you know, for example, Descartes was really interested
in the pineal gland, because it's, it's unitary in the brain. And he felt that that was appropriate
for the, for the common unitary feeling of the integrated feeling of the human experience. But
of course, if you look in the pineal gland, you see a bunch of cells. And if you look inside each of
those, you see all this stuff. So there's an amazing depth of mechanism going all the way down to
molecular networks. And this is, this happens to be a free living organism. But this is the kind of
thing we are made of, we are made of an agential material. We are all a kind of collective
intelligence, because the substrate that we are made of is not a passive material, it actually has
agendas, it has ability to form memories, it can learn, it has preferences, and so on. So so this is
this is our architecture. Now, when we start life, this is an embryonic blastoderm,
or blastoderm, at least a small view of it, let's say we have 50,000 cells. And we look at that at
those 50,000 cells, and we say, okay, there's an embryo, one embryo, what are we counting? What are we
really counting when we look at 50,000 cells, and we say that that's an embryo? Well, what we're really
counting is, first of all, alignment, functional alignment towards a goal, what we're saying is that
all of these cells are going to work together to make a very particular journey in the anatomical space,
starting with one cell and ending with a normal, let's say human in this case, target morphology.
And fundamentally, what we're counting here is the commitment to the same story. All of these cells
are committed to the same set of preferences and goals in anatomical space. And that's why they're
all going to work towards making this. And this is not simply a mechanical process of complexity
emerging from simple rules, because we know, and I don't have time to show you, but there are many
examples that show that if you try to deviate them from this path, they are very good at finding new
ways to get there. So one of the key things is that there are lots of similarities here between the
construction of the body and the construction of the mind. If you didn't know what a human was,
and somebody showed you the material of a brain and asked, so how many cells actually can fit in here?
You know, what's the density of cells per medium? We actually don't know, we don't have a way of
knowing that. And it isn't genetically determined in the case of development either, because
if you take this blastoderm, let's say a chicken or a duck egg, and you use a little needle
to make some scratches here in this blastoderm, for the few hours before these things heal up,
each of these islands is going to, not being able to feel the presence of the others, is going to
self-organize into an embryo. Each one of them is going to be its own self. And so what you're going
to find is something like this, you can make twins, triplets, probably up to half a dozen or so. And
there's a couple of interesting things that you see. First of all, the number of individuals that
come from this blastoderm, okay, and this of course happens in humans too, whether conjoined or not
conjoined, the number of individuals that come out of this excitable medium is not known. It is not
fixed in advance by genetics. Most of the time it's one, but it could be anywhere from zero to
half a dozen or more. And the next thing that happens is that each of these embryos
commits to a particular path in the anatomical space. And the cells here in between, they have to
decide, am I part of this embryo or am I part of that embryo? Okay, so there's a scale up going on here
in which individual cells will bind into a collective, which will go off and do specific
things. And actually the cells at the border have a difficult time. Some of them have problems
deciding, am I the left side of embryo two or am I the right side of embryo one? And for this reason,
it's been long known that conjoined human twins will exhibit laterality defects. So left, right
inversions of the heart, the gut, and so on in one of the twins, because some of these cells have a hard
time figuring out where they are. So this is the process of coming into the world as a self. The
first thing you have to do is figure out where your borders are. Where do you end and the outside world
begins? And this of course has many implications in neuroscience as well, issues in individuation
for dissociative disorders and so on. So one of the first problems that has to be solved is the problem
of understanding left versus right. Now, even individual cells, so here's a chiral paramecium,
here's a slime mold, this whole thing is one cell, and they have a preferential rightward bias. When
they hit a T-maze, they have a built-in asymmetry. So even individual cells already have broken
the symmetry between left and right. Very interesting because macroscopically, the universe does not
distinguish left from right. At the quantum level, it does, but macroscopically, it does not.
And so all of the cells in the embryo have to do a very interesting thing. They all know
which direction is, let's say, rightward, okay? So all the cells have that same information that
that way is rightward, but they have to convert this into knowing where relative to the midline
they are. So this is a chick embryo, here's the midline, and the cells here on the left side have
turned on a particular gene called nodal because they already know that they are on the left side of
the midline. So relative to the other cells in the midline of this body. The way that actually
happens is that from at the very earliest moments of fertilization, at the, in fact, at the first
cleavage, there are particular bioelectrical machinery. So proteins that create an electrical
gradient migrate to one side. So they all go rightward here. This sets up a voltage gradient,
which we can measure. And that voltage gradient yanks along something called serotonin, which is a
neurotransmitter. So one reason this might be interesting in this context is, and related to
some of Ian's work, is because you see right from the earliest moments of development, questions of
laterality, questions of asymmetry, use of a neurotransmitter to solve these problems long
before neurons or the brain shows up. And in this case, bioelectricity, by virtue of its control of
neurotransmitter signaling, is involved in the collective decision making that's required to set
up an embryo as distinct from individual cells. Now, these, these, these, these collectives have all
kinds of interesting problem solving properties. First of all, upon injury, so this is a salamander,
if they lose their arm, they will regenerate, okay, and they will, they will make exactly what's
needed, and then they stop no matter where they were amputated. So now that's the most amazing part
of regeneration is that they know when to stop. And the same thing happens in these tadpoles that have
to rearrange their face to be a frog. If you create a so-called Picasso tadpole where everything is in
the wrong place, the eye is on the back of the head, the mouth is off to the side, they will actually
rearrange in novel ways, give you a very normal looking frog. So what the genetics does not give you
in any of these cases is a hardwired machine that always does the same thing under all circumstances.
There may be a few species that do that, but by and large, that's not what you get. What you get
is a highly flexible error minimization scheme, you get something that's able to correct despite
novel circumstances, this being William James's definition of intelligence, right, the ability to
hit the same goals by different needs. And, and I want to just highlight the, the incredible problem
that these, that these organisms solve. So this is a cross section through the kidney lumen of a
newt. And you can see that there's about eight to 10 cells that normally go, are used to make up this,
the structure. So there's a trick you can use in the early egg where you allow the chromosomes to
multiply, but the, the cell itself does not divide. And so they end up with lots more DNA. And in that
case, the cell itself will get bigger. So if that happens, what you see is that the newt is exactly the
same size. It just uses fewer cells to do the exact same job. Now, what's really remarkable is
that if you make the cells truly gigantic, then something new happens instead of using cell to
cell communication here, that it uses a different molecular mechanism, cytoskeletal bending, and each
cell will bend around itself, leaving an empty spot inside. So, so, so think of what this, what this
animal has to do coming into the world. You don't know how many cells you're going to have. You don't
know what the size of your cells are going to be. You don't know how many copies of your genome you're
going to have. You can't rely on any of this stuff. All of these things that supposedly were,
were honed by evolution. You can't assume any of that. And so you have to be able to, in this kind
of creative problem solving, you have to deploy a new molecular mechanisms that, that are at your
disposal to get the job done, to, to complete that journey in Morpha space, despite the fact that not
only it's not just external injury, it's not just that the environment's changed, your own parts have
changed. You can't even rely on the consistency of your own parts. And this ends up being, being
actually, actually a very interesting property that I think is the ladder for intelligence. It's
kind of a ratchet for, for intelligence in, in, in biology. So how does all this work? Well, years ago,
we started to take inspiration from neuroscience, which of course is used to these multi-scale problems
where you understand the scaling of information from, from very small components all the way up through
cognitive high-level cognitive functions. And we know that there is this bioelectrical machinery
that sets voltage states that propagate through networks. And you can try to decode those electrical
states here. This is a, this is a living zebrafish brain. And you can see all the physiology that's
going on here as this fish is thinking about whatever it is that fish think about. And what we
realized is that this is actually not unique to neurons or brains. Every cell in your body does this.
Evolution discovered this many, many, uh, eons ago. This is extremely early about the time of
bacterial biofilms. It discovered that electricity was a great way to scale minds from tiny little
microbial, uh, uh, components all the way up through larger kinds of things. And so every cell in your body
has these, uh, these, this electrical signaling. Most of them become, uh, uh, coupled into networks with
electrical synapses. And we can ask the same question. What, uh, we, we know what these networks think
about, uh, you know, they think about moving you through three-dimensional space, for example,
what do these networks think about? Well, they think about moving you through anatomical space.
And you can see what this looks like. This is a voltage sensitive fluorescent dye technique that we
developed. This is a, um, uh, a frog embryo that's about to put its face together. And long before the
genes come on to regionalize the face, you can see here, this is, you're now reading the mind of this
collective intelligence. You can see, this is what it's going to build right here. Here's, this is the
electric face. And, and I'm showing this one too, because many of the patterns are very hard to
decode. This one's easy. It looks like a face. So here's where the animal's right eye is going to be.
Here are the placodes. Here's the mouth. This is what's going to guide the gene expression and the,
uh, subsequent, um, anatomy. And of course there are pathological patterns. You know,
if a human oncogene is injected that will eventually make a tumor, you can already detect at an early
stage. These are the cells that are going to disconnect from the environment, go off like amoebas,
treat the rest of the body as just external environment. We'll talk about that, um, in a
minute. So, so these, these bioelectrical patterns are, are literally the memory in the excitable
medium of this collective intelligence that control where they go in anatomical space.
So we've learned partially to communicate with them and convince them to do other things.
So, uh, here by injecting, uh, uh, MRNA encoding a potassium channel. So this is something that's going
to change the voltage of the cell. There are no fields. There are no waves, no magnets,
no electromagnetic radiation. That's not how we do it. We use the native interface that the
cells are using to hack each other during embryogenesis. We're just taking advantage of it.
And what we can do is we can, we can apply, we can, um, uh, uh, instill in these cells,
a particular, uh, voltage state that is, uh, basically says to them, make an eye. And if you do
that in cells that are going to give rise, uh, normally will give rise to the gut here. So this is a
tadpole. Here's the native eye. Here's the gut. Uh, those cells will happily build an eye,
and that eye will have all the lens retina optic nerve, all the same stuff. So we learned a few
things here. We learned that the bioelectric memories are actually instructive. They actually
tell the organs where to go. They're very modular. They're, they're top-down control. We didn't tell
these cells how to build an eye. They already know how to build an eye. All we said, we just gave them
enough information to say, go ahead and do that. We didn't give all the information on all the strategies.
So we're not talking to the individual stem cells. We're not talking to the, we're not micromanaging
the, the gene expression, nothing like that. Um, and, uh, we discovered a counter the developmental
biology textbook, which will tell you that only these cells have the competency to become I,
but actually, if you prompt them in the correct way, uh, pretty much all cells in the body have
the competency to do that. So that reminds us, you know, when you're judging the competency of some
system, you're really taking an IQ test yourself because you may just not have found the right way to
interface with the capabilities of that system. Um, and there's some very interesting
dynamics that happen when you do this, the cells that we've injected are saying to their neighbors,
let's build an eye. And in particular, if there's only a few of them, they will sometimes convince
all these other cells around to participate in the process. The blue ones are the ones we injected,
but there's not enough of them. And they know that. And so they, they, uh, activate all these others
to work with them. But of course the cells around them that are trying to suppress cancer are saying
you're crazy. Don't be an eye. You should be skin. We're all, we're all going to be skin or we're
gut or whatever. And they have this back and forth conversation that we can now track,
that determines what happens. Um, we can rewrite this memory in creatures like planaria. So these
are flatworms. You can, uh, cut these flatworms into pieces. Every piece reliably knows what to make.
And so there's this bioelectrical pattern memory that says one head, one tail. If we edit that memory
and, uh, convince them to do this. So, so this kind of pattern, if you cut this animal, now you will get
a two headed flatworm. This is not Photoshop or AI. These are real, real animals. Now, very importantly,
this is not a bioelectrical pattern of this two headed animal. This is a bioelectrical pattern
of this perfectly normal looking one headed animal whose anatomy is normal, whose molecular biology
is normal. This is a counterfactual memory. This is the early evolutionary version of our mental time
travel, because what this animal is doing is the body is storing a memory of what you will do if you
get injured in the future. This is not what you're doing now. This is what you think a correct
planarian looks like. And so the body can store at least one of two different representations of what
a correct animal looks like, which is what you will use if you injure it. Uh, I call, I call this, uh,
memory also because once you've reset it, it stays. So if you take these two headed animals and continue
to recut them, um, by the way, don't feel too bad about the recutting. This is how they normally
reproduce as they tear themselves in half and regenerate and go on. So, so if you, uh, if you, um,
recut them, remove the primary head, remove this ectopic secondary head, the middle fragment is now
forever convinced that normal planaria should have two heads and we can actually reset it back to one.
So we have the ability to actually, uh, uh, in, uh, incept new memories into that, um, anatomical,
uh, collective intelligence and, and tell it where it should go if, uh, if it gets in trouble.
Um, and here you can see the video. These are what these two headed, uh, two headed animals are like.
Now, um, the last, uh, bit of this, I want to tell you is a story about cancer.
So what evolution has done remarkably is, uh, use bioelectricity as a kind of cognitive glue
to scale up the goals of these biological systems. So individual cells have little tiny goals. All
they care about is the local, uh, physiological states here, but together, uh, what, what, what
evolution has allowed is for them to join into electrical networks that maintain very large scale,
very grandiose, large scale goals, like building a limb. If you deviate them from that goal by
injury, they will continue, uh, and they will rebuild. And then they stop. But that process
has a failure mode and that failure mode is cancer because what can happen, this is a human
glioblastoma cells moving around. What can happen is that, uh, if there's an oncogene or actually many
other things that can cause cancer, uh, what it will do is cause the cells to disconnect electrically
from their neighbors. At that point, the rest of the body just becomes more environment than they do
what all, uh, single cell organisms do. They reproduce as much as they can. They go where
life is good. That's metastasis. And so what's happening here is that these cancer cells are not
more selfish than normal cells. Uh, their selves are smaller. So the boundary between self and world,
whereas before it was huge, probably the size of an organ or maybe the whole animal, it's now
literally shrunk to the size of a single cell. And it's still every man for himself, but now that border
is tiny. So their self, their model of where the self ends in the outside world begins has shrunk.
And so we can use that kind of thinking to design a therapeutic. What if we artificially force these
cells to continue being part of that electrical network? We won't kill them. We won't turn off
the oncogene. We will simply force them into electrical communication with their neighbors.
And if you do that, this is the same animal. Here's the oncoprotein blazingly expressed. There's no
tumor. Okay. And that's because we've, we've injected an ion channel that controls the bioelectric
potential. It doesn't fix the genomics, but that's okay. You don't need to. So, uh, I think
that in the future, what, what's going to happen is that, um, future, uh, biomedicine is going to look
a lot more like a kind of somatic psychiatry, um, than it is like chemistry. This is what we do now,
all of these bottom-up interventions, because we treat, um, cells and tissues as simple mechanical
machines. They're machines, but they're not simple mechanical machines. They're agential beings with
problem-solving capacities, and we can, uh, interface with them using all kinds of interesting,
uh, novel, uh, technologies that are now, uh, forthcoming. So the very last bit, uh, I want
to talk about is this, uh, what I've shown you in terms of regeneration and so on is the ability to
restore and rebuild to the correct target morphology. Um, what about the plasticity? How, how far away can
we go from that? And I just want to point out that normal development, uh, really, um, puts us into a
false sense of security, a false sense of understanding because acorns always make oak
trees. And we think that we know what the acorn genome can do. It makes this every single time,
but if prompted by a non-human bioengineer, that would be this, this wasp here, these exact same
cells with no genomic change could build something completely different. They can build these amazing
galls. And if not for this little guy, we would have had no idea that these cells are actually capable
of doing that. So one of the things that we do in our lab is we'll, we'll borrow some skin cells
from an early frog embryo. We put them in a little, uh, little depression here. And what they do is
they, uh, uh, they don't do any of the things you might assume they would do. They actually come
together to be something we call a xenobot. These, uh, these are autonomous, uh, novel, uh, kinds of, uh,
constructs. They are a proto-organism. They swim along. They can go in circles. They can patrol back and
forth. They have this group behavior. Here's one navigating a maze. Watch what it'll do. It swims along here.
Here, it's going to take this corner without having to bump into the other side first. So it takes the
corner. Then at this point, it spontaneously turns around, uh, and, and goes back where it came from.
So we're, we're in the process of studying their ability to learn their various behaviors. But one
thing they do is if you provide them with loose skin cells, they will, uh, run around and, uh, collect
those skin cells into a little ball. And because they're dealing with an agential material, these are not
passive pebbles. These are cells. Those balls, uh, mature into the next generation of xenobots.
And guess what they do? They do exactly the same thing. And so you get multiple generation.
So this is kinematic self-replication. So you can ask, what did the frog genome actually learn
during its many years of evolution? Well, it certainly learned by default to do this. So these are,
this is the normal developmental sequence, uh, and, and these are the behaviors, but it also can do this.
This is a, this is a xenobot developmental sequence. I have no idea what it's trying to become. Uh,
there's never been any xenobots before. There's never been any evolutionary selection to be a good
xenobot. Uh, so this is, uh, this is, this is something completely novel that, that these cells can,
can, um, can do in a, to, to repurpose their hardware in a new way. And, um, what I just want to
end with is to point out that this is not some weird fluke of embryonic cells or amphibian cells.
Look at, look at this little, little, uh, proto-organism. So if I showed you this,
you might think that this came from a, uh, the bottom of a pond somewhere. Uh, well,
if you sequence this, what you will see is 100% homo sapiens. These are human cells. These are adult
patient tracheal epithelial cells donated by, uh, by human patients during a trachea biopsies.
And in a particular novel environment, they will self-assemble into this little thing that we've
called an anthrobot. Now they have all kinds of cool properties. One of the coolest is that if you have
some neurons here growing in a dish and you make a scratch wound, they will navigate, uh,
down that little scratch wound. And when they settle into a group, this is kind of like a
super bot cluster. There's probably 10 of them here. What they will do is they will sit there
and knit the sides of the neural wound together. Four days later, you pick them up and you see that what
they were doing here is, is healing this neuronal scratch wound culture. And that's just the first
thing we found out who knows what else they're capable of. So just imagine who knew that your tracheal
cells that sit there for decades quietly in your, in your airway actually have the ability to make
an autonomous self-multile little organism. It's never existed before. It's not how humans develop.
It's not, uh, anything in our lineage, uh, that actually has the ability to, to run around your
body and, uh, and, and make, uh, make these kinds of repairs. So what I think is that by making these
kinds of things, uh, and I didn't even tell you the story where we can make, uh, planaria, um, take on the
head shapes of other species. So the same hardware with no genetic modification visits attractors in
that, uh, anatomical state space that belong to other species. I think all of these synthetic
beings and everything else that are made here are, are vehicles for exploring a platonic space of
affordances that, uh, go way beyond the one little pin, uh, sort of pinhole that we normally see in
normal development and normal regeneration. And that by using various techniques, we can actually start
to map out the space and ask, you know, okay, if, if evolutionary selection is not what, uh, created
these things, um, where are these patterns coming from? And I think we now, uh, uh, have a, have a way
of, of starting to, uh, to understand this. And the very last thing I will just say is that, uh, I'm, I'm
very conscious of the fact that the talk that I gave was, it was exclusively kind of a left brain talk.
And so, um, in the week leading up to this, I did, uh, uh, take an attempt at a, at a kind of a right brain
contribution. And so, um, you can see here at this, uh, at this URL or, or here, I wrote a little
bit of, uh, what this whole topic of diverse intelligence might look like if, uh, if, if
addressed from a more right brain perspective. So I'll stop here. Um, just thank the, uh, the,
the postdocs and the grad students who do all the work, uh, thank our funders who support us, um,
some disclosures because there's a few biotech companies that are supporting our work. And, uh,
of course the animals, because they do, they do all the, all the hard work. So thank you so much.
Thank you.
