The Courage to Be Disliked

by Ichiro Kishimi and Fumitake Koga

Authors’ Note
Introduction
THE FIRST NIGHT:
Deny Trauma
The Unknown Third Giant
Why People Can Change
Trauma Does Not Exist
People Fabricate Anger
How to Live Without Being Controlled by the Past
Socrates and Adler
Are You Okay Just As You Are?
Unhappiness Is Something You Choose for Yourself
People Always Choose Not to Change
Your Life Is Decided Here and Now
THE SECOND NIGHT:
All Problems Are Interpersonal Relationship Problems
Why You Dislike Yourself
All Problems Are Interpersonal Relationship Problems
Feelings of Inferiority Are Subjective Assumptions
An Inferiority Complex Is an Excuse
Braggarts Have Feelings of Inferiority
Life Is Not a Competition
You’re the Only One Worrying About Your Appearance
From Power Struggle to Revenge
Admitting Fault Is Not Defeat
Overcoming the Tasks That Face You in Life
Red String and Rigid Chains
Don’t Fall for the “Life-Lie”
From the Psychology of Possession to the Psychology of Practice
THE THIRD NIGHT:
Discard Other People’s Tasks
Deny the Desire for Recognition
Do Not Live to Satisfy the Expectations of Others
How to Separate Tasks
Discard Other People’s Tasks
How to Rid Yourself of Interpersonal Relationship Problems
Cut the Gordian Knot
Desire for Recognition Makes You Unfree
What Real Freedom Is
You Hold the Cards to Interpersonal Relationships
THE FOURTH NIGHT:
Where the Center of the World Is
Individual Psychology and Holism
The Goal of Interpersonal Relationships Is a Feeling of Community
Why Am I Only Interested In Myself?
You Are Not the Center of the World
Listen to the Voice of a Larger Community
Do Not Rebuke or Praise
The Encouragement Approach
How to Feel You Have Value
Exist in the Present
People Cannot Make Proper Use of Self
THE FIFTH NIGHT:
To Live in Earnest in the Here and Now
Excessive Self-Consciousness Stifles the Self
Not Self-Affirmation—Self-Acceptance
The Difference Between Trust and Confidence
The Essence of Work Is a Contribution to the Common Good
Young People Walk Ahead of Adults
Workaholism Is a Life-Lie
You Can Be Happy Now
Two Paths Traveled by Those Wanting to Be “Special Beings”
The Courage to Be Normal
Life Is a Series of Moments
Live Like You’re Dancing
Shine a Light on the Here and Now
The Greatest Life-Lie
Give Meaning to Seemingly Meaningless Life
Afterword
About the AuthorsAuthors’ Note
Sigmund Freud, Carl Jung, and Alfred Adler are all giants in the world of psychology. This book is a distillation of Adler’s philosophical and psychological ideas and teachings, taking the form of a narrative dialogue between a philosopher and a young man.

Adlerian psychology enjoys a broad base of support in Europe and the United States, and presents simple and straightforward answers to the philosophical question: How can one be happy? Adlerian psychology might hold the key. Reading this book could change your life. Now, let us accompany the young man and venture beyond the “door.”On the outskirts of the thousand-year-old city lived a philosopher who taught that the world was simple and that happiness was within the reach of every man, instantly. A young man who was dissatisfied with life went to visit this philosopher to get to the heart of the matter. This youth found the world a chaotic mass of contradictions and, in his anxious eyes, any notion of happiness was completely absurd.Introduction
YOUTH:I want to ask you once again; you do believe that the world is, in all ways, a simple place?
PHILOSOPHER:Yes, this world is astonishingly simple and life itself is, too.

YOUTH:So, is this your idealistic argument or is it a workable theory? What I mean is, are you saying that any issues you or I face in life are simple too?
PHILOSOPHER:Yes, of course.

YOUTH:Alright then, but let me explain why I have come to visit you today. Firstly, I want to debate this with you until I am satisfied, and then, if possible, I want to get you to retract this theory.

PHILOSOPHER:Ha-ha.

YOUTH:Because I have heard all about your reputation. The word is that there is an eccentric philosopher living here whose teachings and arguments are hard to ignore, namely, that people can change, that the world is simple and that everyone can be happy. That is the sort of thing I have heard, but I find that view totally unacceptable, so I wanted to confirm things for myself. If I find anything you say completely off, I will point it out and then correct you  .  .  . But will you find that annoying?
