YOUTH:So you said that today we would discuss freedom.

PHILOSOPHER:Yes. Did you have any time to think about what freedom is?
YOUTH:Yes, actually. I thought about it at great length.

PHILOSOPHER:And did you arrive at any conclusions?
YOUTH:Well, I couldn’t find any answers. But I did find this—it’s not my own idea, but something I came across at the library, a line from a novel by Dostoevsky: “Money is coined freedom.” What do you think? Isn’t “coined freedom” a rather refreshing term? But seriously, I was fascinated to find this one line that drove right to the heart of this thing called money.

PHILOSOPHER:I see. Certainly, if one were to speak in a very general sense of the true nature of that which is brought about by money, one might say that is freedom. It is an astute observation, to be sure. But you wouldn’t go so far as to say that “freedom therefore is money,” would you?
YOUTH:It’s exactly as you say. There probably is freedom that can be gained by way of money. And I’m sure that freedom is greater than we imagine. Because, in reality, all the necessities of life are dealt with through financial transactions. Does it follow, then, that if one possesses great wealth, one can be free? I don’t believe that is the case; I would certainly like to believe that it is not the case, and that human values and human happiness cannot be bought with money.

PHILOSOPHER:Well, say for the moment that you have obtained financial freedom. And then, though you have gained great wealth, you have not found happiness. At that time, what problems and privations would remain for you?
YOUTH:It would be the interpersonal relationships you have been mentioning. I have thought deeply about this matter. For instance, you might be blessed by great wealth but not have anyone who loves you; you have no comrades whom you could call friends, and you are not liked by anyone. This is a great misfortune. Another thing I can’t get out of my head is the word “bonds.” Every one of us is tangled up and writhing in these strings that we call bonds. Having to be attached to a person you don’t even care for, for example, or to always watch out for your awful boss’s mood swings. Imagine, if you could be released from such petty interpersonal relationships, how easy things would be! But no one can really do such a thing. Wherever we go, we are surrounded by other people, and we are social individuals, who exist in our relations to other people. No matter what we do, we cannot escape the strong rope of our interpersonal relationships. I see now that Adler’s statement “All problems are interpersonal relationship problems” is a great insight.

PHILOSOPHER:It is a crucial point. Let’s dig a little deeper. What is it about our interpersonal relationships that is robbing us of our freedom?
YOUTH:Last time, you spoke about whether one thinks of other people as enemies or as comrades. You said that if one becomes able to see others as one’s comrades, one’s way of looking at the world should change as well. That certainly makes sense. I felt quite convinced the other day when I left here. But then what happened? I gave the matter some careful thought, and I noticed that there are aspects of interpersonal relationships that can’t be completely explained.

PHILOSOPHER:Like what?
YOUTH:The most obvious one is the existence of parents. I could never think of parents as enemies. During my childhood, especially, they were my greatest guardians who raised and protected me. In that regard, I am sincerely grateful. Still, my parents were strict people. I told you about this last time, that they always compared me to my older brother and refused to recognize me. And they have constantly made comments about my life, saying I should study more, not make friends with people like this or that, get into this university at the very least, get this kind of job, and so on. Their demands put a lot of pressure on me and were certainly bonds.

PHILOSOPHER:Then, what did you end up doing?
YOUTH:It seems to me that until I started university, I was never able to ignore my parents’ intentions. I was anxious, which was unpleasant, but the fact of the matter is that my wishes always seemed to end up overlapping with my parents’. My place of work I chose myself, however.

PHILOSOPHER:Now that you mention it, I haven’t heard about that yet. What kind of work do you do?
YOUTH:I’m now working as a librarian at a university library. My parents wanted me to take on my father’s printing plant, like my brother did. Because of this, ever since I started my current job, our relationship has been somewhat strained. If they weren’t my parents, and instead were enemy-like presences in my life, I probably wouldn’t have minded at all. Because no matter how much they might have tried to interfere, I could always just ignore them. But as I’ve said, parents to me are not enemies. Whether or not they are comrades is another matter, but, at the very least, they are not what I would call enemies. It’s a relationship that is much too close to be able to just ignore their intentions
PHILOSOPHER:When you decided which university you would go to in line with your parents’ wishes, what sort of emotion did you feel with regard to your parents?
YOUTH:It’s complicated. I did have feelings of resentment, but on the other hand there was this sense of relief, too. You know, that I could get them to recognize me if I went to that school.

PHILOSOPHER:You could get them to recognize you?
YOUTH:Come on, let’s stop the roundabout leading questions. I’m sure you know what I’m referring to. It’s the so-called desire for recognition. It’s interpersonal relationship problems in a nutshell. We human beings live in constant need of recognition from others. It is precisely because the other person is not an abhorrent enemy that one wants recognition from him, isn’t it? So yes, that’s right; I wanted to be recognized by my parents.

PHILOSOPHER:I see. Let’s talk about one of the major premises of Adlerian psychology regarding this matter. Adlerian psychology denies the need to seek recognition from others.

YOUTH:It denies the desire for recognition?
PHILOSOPHER:There is no need to be recognized by others. Actually, one must not seek recognition. This point cannot be overstated.

YOUTH:No way! Isn’t desire for recognition a truly universal desire that motivates all human beings?Do Not Live to Satisfy the Expectations of Others
PHILOSOPHER:Being recognized by others is certainly something to be happy about. But it would be wrong to say that being recognized is absolutely necessary. For what does one seek recognition in the first place? Or, to put it more succinctly, why does one want to be praised by others?
YOUTH:It’s simple. It’s through being recognized by others that each of us can truly feel we have value. It is through recognition from others that one becomes able to wipe away one’s feelings of inferiority. One learns to have confidence in oneself. Yes, it’s an issue of value. I think you mentioned it last time: that the feeling of inferiority is an issue of value judgment. It’s because I could never get recognition from my parents that I have lived a life tainted by feelings of inferiority.

PHILOSOPHER:Now let’s consider a familiar setting. For example, let’s say you’ve been picking up litter around your workplace. The thing is, no one seems to notice at all. Or if they do, no one has given you any appreciation for what you’ve done, or even said a single word of thanks. Well, will you keep on picking up litter from now on?
YOUTH:That’s a difficult situation. I suppose that if no one appreciates what I’m doing, I might stop.

PHILOSOPHER:Why?
YOUTH:Picking up litter is for everyone. If I’m rolling up my sleeves and getting it done, but I don’t get a word of thanks? I guess I’d probably lose my motivation.

PHILOSOPHER:This is the danger of the desire for recognition. Why is it that people seek recognition from others? In many cases, it is due to the influence of reward-and-punishment education.

YOUTH:Reward-and-punishment education?
PHILOSOPHER:If one takes appropriate action, one receives praise. If one takes inappropriate action, one receives punishment. Adler was very critical of education by reward and punishment. It leads to mistaken lifestyles in which people think, If no one is going to praise me, I won’t take appropriate actionand If no one is going to punish me, I’ll engage in inappropriate actions, too.You already have the goal of wanting to be praised when you start picking up litter. And if you aren’t praised by anyone, you’ll either be indignant or decide that you’ll never do such a thing again. Clearly, there’s something wrong with this situation.

YOUTH:No! I wish you wouldn’t trivialize things. I’m not arguing about education. Wanting to be recognized by people you like, to be accepted by people close to you, is a normal desire.

PHILOSOPHER:You are badly mistaken. Look, we are not living to satisfy other people’s expectations.

YOUTH:What do you mean?
PHILOSOPHER:You are not living to satisfy other people’s expectations, and neither am I. It is not necessary to satisfy other people’s expectations.

YOUTH:That is such a self-serving argument! Are you saying one should think only about oneself and live self-righteously?
PHILOSOPHER:In the teachings of Judaism, one finds a view that goes something like this: If you are not living your life for yourself, then who is going to live it for you? You are living only your own life. When it comes to who you are living it for, of course it’s you. And then, if you are not living your life for yourself, who could there be to live it instead of you? Ultimately, we live thinking about “I.” There is no reason that we must not think that way.

YOUTH:So you are afflicted by the poison of nihilism, after all. You say that, ultimately, we live thinking about “I”? And that that’s okay? What a wretched way of thinking!
PHILOSOPHER:It is not nihilism at all. Rather, it’s the opposite. When one seeks recognition from others, and concerns oneself only with how one is judged by others, in the end, one is living other people’s lives.

YOUTH:What does that mean?
PHILOSOPHER:Wishing so hard to be recognized will lead to a life of following expectations held by other people who want you to be “this kind of person.” In other words, you throw away who you really are and live other people’s lives. And please remember this: If you are not living to satisfy other people’s expectations, it follows that other people are not living to satisfy your expectations. Someone might not act the way you want him to, but it doesn’t do to get angry. That’s only natural.

YOUTH:No, it is not! That is an argument that overturns our society from its very foundation. Look, we have the desire for recognition. But in order to receive recognition from others, first we have to recognize others ourselves. It is because one recognizes other people and other systems of values that one is recognized by others. It is through this relationship of mutual recognition that our very society is built. Your argument is an abhorrent, dangerous way of thinking, which will drive human beings into isolation and lead to conflict. It’s a diabolical solicitation to needlessly stir up distrust and doubt.

PHILOSOPHER:Ha-ha, you certainly have an interesting vocabulary. There’s no need to raise your voice—let’s think about this together. One has to get recognition, or one will suffer. If one doesn’t get recognition from others and from one’s parents, one won’t have confidence. Can such a life be healthy? So one could think, God is watching, so accumulate good deeds.But that and the nihilist view that “there is no God, so all evil deeds are permitted” are two sides of the same coin. Even supposing that God did not exist, and that we could not gain recognition from God, we would still have to live this life. Indeed, it is in order to overcome the nihilism of a godless world that it is necessary to deny recognition from other people.

YOUTH:I don’t care for all this talk about God. Think more straightforwardly and more plainly about the mentality of real, everyday people. What about the desire to be recognized socially, for example? Why does a person want to climb the corporate ladder? Why does a person seek status and fame? It’s the wish to be recognized as somebody important by society as a whole—it’s the desire for recognition.

PHILOSOPHER:Then, if you get that recognition, would you say that you’ve really found happiness? Do people who have established their social status truly feel happy?
YOUTH:No, but that’s  .  .  .

PHILOSOPHER:When trying to be recognized by others, almost all people treat satisfying other people’s expectations as the means to that end. And that is in accordance with the stream of thought of reward-and-punishment education that says one will be praised if one takes appropriate action. If, for example, the main point of your job turns out to be satisfying other people’s expectations, then that job is going to be very hard on you. Because you’ll always be worried about other people looking at you and fear their judgment, and you are repressing your “I-ness.” It might come as a surprise to you, but almost none of my clients who come for counseling are selfish people. Rather, they are suffering trying to meet the expectations of other people, the expectations of their parents and teachers. So, in a good way, they can’t behave in a self-centered fashion.

YOUTH:So I should be selfish?
PHILOSOPHER:Do not behave without regard for others. To understand this, it is necessary to understand the idea in Adlerian psychology known as “separation of tasks.”
YOUTH:Separation of tasks? That’s a new term. Let’s hear about it.

The youth’s irritation had reached its peak. Deny the desire for recognition? Don’t satisfy other people’s expectations? Live in a more self-centered way?What on earth was this philosopher saying? Isn’t the desire for recognition itself people’s greatest motivator for associating with each other and going about the formation of society? The youth wondered, What if this “separation of tasks” idea doesn’t win me over? I won’t be able to accept this man, or Adler for that matter, for the rest of my life.How to Separate Tasks
PHILOSOPHER:Say there’s a child who has a hard time studying. He doesn’t pay attention in class, doesn’t do his homework, and even leaves his books at school. Now, what would you do if you were his father?
YOUTH:Well, of course, I would try everything I could think of to get him to apply himself. I’d hire tutors and make him go to a study center, even if I had to pull him by the ear to get him there. I’d say that’s a parent’s duty. And that’s actually how I was raised myself. I wasn’t allowed to eat dinner until the day’s homework was done.

PHILOSOPHER:Then let me ask another question. Did you learn to enjoy studying as a result of being made to do it in such a heavy-handed manner?
YOUTH:Unfortunately, I did not. I just took care of my studies for school and for exams in a routine way.
