
PHILOSOPHER:I see. All right, I will talk about this from the basic stance of Adlerian psychology. When one is confronted with the task of studying, for instance, in Adlerian psychology we consider it from the perspective of “Whose task is this?”
YOUTH:Whose task?
PHILOSOPHER:Whether the child studies or not. Whether he goes out and plays with his friends or not. Essentially this is the child’s task, not the parent’s task.

YOUTH:Do you mean that it is something the child is supposed to do?
PHILOSOPHER:Simply put, yes. There would be no point if the parents studied instead of the child, would there?
YOUTH:Well, no, there wouldn’t.

PHILOSOPHER:Studying is the child’s task. A parent’s handling of that by commanding the child to study is, in effect, an act of intruding on another person’s task. One is unlikely to avert a collision in this way. We need to think with the perspective of “Whose task is this?” and continually separate one’s own tasks from other people’s tasks.

YOUTH:How does one go about separating them?
PHILOSOPHER:One does not intrude on other people’s tasks. That’s all.

YOUTH:That’s all?
PHILOSOPHER:In general, all interpersonal relationship troubles are caused by intruding on other people’s tasks, or having one’s own tasks intruded on. Carrying out the separation of tasks is enough to change one’s interpersonal relationships dramatically.

YOUTH:Hmm. I don’t really get it. In the first place, how can you tell whose task it is? From my point of view, realistically speaking, getting one’s child to study is the duty of the parents. Because almost no child studies just out of enjoyment, and after all is said and done, the parent is the child’s guardian.

PHILOSOPHER:There is a simple way to tell whose task it is. Think, Who ultimately is going to receive the result brought about by the choice that is made?When the child has made the choice of not studying, ultimately, the result of that decision—not being able to keep up in class or to get into the preferred school, for instance—does not have to be received by the parents. Clearly, it is the child who has to receive it. In other words, studying is the child’s task.

YOUTH:No, no. You’re completely wrong! The parent, who is more experienced in life and also acts as a guardian, has the responsibility to urge the child to study so such situations do not arise. This is something done for the good of the child and is not an act of intruding. While studying may be the child’s task, getting the child to study is the parent’s task.

PHILOSOPHER:It’s true that one often hears parents today using the phrase “It’s for your own good.” But they are clearly doing so in order to fulfill their own goals, which could be their appearance in the eyes of society, their need to put on airs, or their desire for control, for example. In other words, it is not “for your own good” but for the parents’. And it is because the child senses this deception that he rebels.

YOUTH:So even if the child hasn’t been studying at all, you’re saying that, since it’s his task, I should just let him be?
PHILOSOPHER:One has to pay attention. Adlerian psychology does not recommend the noninterference approach. Noninterference is the attitude of not knowing, and not even being interested in knowing what the child is doing. Instead, it is by knowing what the child is doing that one protects him. If it’s studying that is the issue, one tells the child that that is his task, and one lets him know that one is ready to assist him wheneverhe has the urge to study. But one must not intrude on the child’s task. When no requests are being made, it does not do to meddle in things.

YOUTH:Does this go beyond parent-child relationships?
PHILOSOPHER:Yes, of course. In Adlerian psychology counseling, for instance, we do not think of the client’s changing or not changing as the task of the counselor.

YOUTH:What are you saying here?
PHILOSOPHER:As a result of having received counseling, what kind of resolution does the client make? To change his lifestyle, or not. This is the client’s task, and the counselor cannot intervene.

YOUTH:No way, I can’t accept such an irresponsible attitude!
PHILOSOPHER:Naturally, one gives all the assistance one possibly can. But beyond that, one doesn’t intrude. Remember the old saying, “You can lead a horse to water, but you can’t make him drink.” Please think of counseling and all other assistance provided to other people in Adlerian psychology as having that kind of stance. Forcing change while ignoring the person’s intentions will only lead to an intense reaction.

YOUTH:The counselor does not change the client’s life?
PHILOSOPHER:You are the only one who can change yourself.Discard Other People’s Tasks
YOUTH:Then, what about with shut-ins, for example? I mean, with someone like my friend. Even then, would you say it’s the separation of tasks, don’t intervene, and it has no connection to the parents?
PHILOSOPHER:Can he break out of the shut-in situation or not? Or, in what way can he break out of it? In principle, this is a task that the person has to resolve himself. It is not for the parents to intervene. Nevertheless, as they are not complete strangers, some form of assistance is probably needed. At this point, the most important thing is whether the child feels he can consult frankly with his parents when he is experiencing a dilemma, and whether they have been building enough of a trust relationship on a regular basis.

YOUTH:Then, suppose your own child had shut himself in, what would you do? Please answer this not as a philosopher but as a parent.

PHILOSOPHER:First, I myself would think, This is the child’s task.I would try not to intervene in his shut-in situation, and I would refrain from focusing too much attention on it. Then I would send a message to him to the effect that I am ready to assist him whenever he is in need. In that way, the child, having sensed a change in his parent, will have no choice but to make it his own task to think about what he should do. He’ll probably come and ask for assistance, and he’ll probably try to work some things out on his own.

YOUTH:Could you really manage to be so cut and dried if it were your own child who’d become a shut-in?
PHILOSOPHER:A parent suffering over the relationship with his or her child will tend to think, My child is my life.In other words, the parent is taking on the child’s task as his or her own and is no longer able to think about anything but the child. When at last the parent notices it, the “I” is already gone from his or her life. However, no matter how much of the burden of the child’s task one carries, the child is still an independent individual. Children do not become what their parents want them to become. In their choices of university, place of employment, and partner in marriage, and even in the everyday subtleties of speech and conduct, they do not act according to their parents’ wishes. Naturally, the parents will worry about them, and probably want to intervene at times. But, as I said earlier, other people are not living to satisfy your expectations. Though the child is one’s own, he or she is not living to satisfy one’s expectations as a parent.

YOUTH:So you have to draw the line even with family?
PHILOSOPHER:Actually, with families there is less distance, so it’s all the more necessary to consciously separate the tasks.

YOUTH:That doesn’t make sense. On the one hand, you’re talking about love, and on the other, you’re denying it. If you draw the line between yourself and other people that way, you won’t be able to believe in anyone anymore!
PHILOSOPHER:Look, the act of believing is also the separation of tasks. You believe in your partner; that is your task. But how that person acts with regard to your expectations and trust is other people’s tasks. When you push your wishes without having drawn that line, before you know it you’re engaging in stalker-like intervention. Suppose your partner did not act as you had wished. Would you still be able to believe in that person? Would you still be able to love that person? The task of love that Adler speaks of is composed of such questions.

YOUTH:That’s difficult! That’s very difficult.

PHILOSOPHER:Of course it is. But think about it this way: Intervening in other people’s tasks and taking on other people’s tasks turns one’s life into something heavy and full of hardship. If you are leading a life of worry and suffering—which stems from interpersonal relationships—learn the boundary of “From here on, that is not my task.” And discard other people’s tasks. That is the first step toward lightening the load and making life simpler.How to Rid Yourself of Interpersonal Relationship Problems
YOUTH:I don’t know, it just doesn’t sit right with me.

PHILOSOPHER:Then let’s envision a scene in which your parents are vehemently opposing your choice of place of employment. They were in fact against it, weren’t they?
YOUTH:Yes, they were. I wouldn’t go so far as saying they were vehemently opposed, but they did make various snide remarks.

PHILOSOPHER:Well, let’s exaggerate it and say they were vehemently opposed. Your father was ranting and raving with emotion, and your mother was protesting your decision with tears in her eyes. They absolutely do not approve of you becoming a librarian, and if you will not take on the family business like your brother has, they may very well disown you. But how to come to terms with the emotion of “not approving” is your parents’ task, not yours. It is not a problem for you to worry about.

YOUTH:Now wait a minute. Are you saying that it doesn’t matter how sad I make my parents feel?
PHILOSOPHER:That’s right. It doesn’t matter.

YOUTH:You’ve got to be joking! Could there be such a thing as a philosophy that recommends unfilial behavior?
PHILOSOPHER:All you can do with regard to your own life is choose the best path that you believe in. On the other hand, what kind of judgment do other people pass on that choice? That is the task of other people, and is not a matter you can do anything about.

YOUTH:What another person thinks of you—if he or she likes you or dislikes you—that is that person’s task, not mine. Is that what you are saying?
PHILOSOPHER:That is what separating is. You are worried about other people looking at you. You are worried about being judged by other people. That is why you are constantly craving recognition from others. Now, why are you worried about other people looking at you, anyway? Adlerian psychology has an easy answer. You haven’t done the separation of tasks yet. You assume that even things that should be other people’s tasks are your own. Remember the words of the grandmother: “You’re the only one who’s worried how you look.” Her remark drives right to the heart of the separation of tasks. What other people think when they see your face—that is the task of other people and is not something you have any control over.

YOUTH:As theory, I get it. To my reasoning brain, it does make sense. But my emotions can’t keep up with such a high-handed argument.

PHILOSOPHER:Then let’s try another tack. Say there’s a man who’s distressed about the interpersonal relationships at the company where he works. He has a completely irrational boss who yells at him at every opportunity. No matter how hard he tries, his boss doesn’t acknowledge his efforts and never even really listens to what he says.

YOUTH:That sounds exactly like my boss.

PHILOSOPHER:But is being acknowledged by your boss “work” that you should think of as top priority? It isn’t your job to be liked by people at the place you work. Your boss doesn’t like you. And his reasons for not liking you are clearly unreasonable. But in that case, there’s no need for you to get cozy with him.

YOUTH:That sounds right, but the person is my boss, right? I won’t get any work done if I’m shunned by my direct superior.

PHILOSOPHER:That is Adler’s life-lie again. I can’t do my work because I’ve been shunned by my boss. It’s the boss’s fault that my work isn’t going well. The person who says such things is bringing up the existence of the boss as an excuse for the work that doesn’t go well. Much like the female student with the fear of blushing, it’s actually that you need the existence of an awful boss. Because then you can say, “If only I didn’t have this boss, I could get more work done.”
YOUTH:No, you don’t know my relationship with my boss! I wish you would stop making arbitrary guesses.

PHILOSOPHER:This is a discussion that is concerned with the fundamentals of Adlerian psychology. If you are angry, nothing will sink in. You think, I’ve got that boss, so I can’t work.This is complete etiology. But it’s really, I don’t want to work, so I’ll create an awful boss,or I don’t want to acknowledge my incapable self, so I’ll create an awful boss.That would be the teleological way of looking at it.
