PHILOSOPHER:Well, you’re looking rather gloomy today.

YOUTH:You see, since we last met, I’ve been thinking calmly and carefully about the separation of tasks, and about freedom. I waited until my emotions had settled and then applied my reasoning mind. But the separation of tasks just doesn’t seem realistic.

PHILOSOPHER:Hmm, okay. Please go on.

YOUTH:Separating tasks is basically an idea that boils down to defining a boundary and saying, “I am I, and you are you.” Sure, there are probably fewer interpersonal relationship problems that way. But would you really say that such a way of life is right? To me, it just seems like an extremely self-centered, misguided individualism. On my first visit here, you told me that Adlerian psychology is formally referred to as “individual psychology.” That term had been bothering me for quite a while, but I finally figured out why: What you’re calling Adlerian psychology, or individual psychology, is essentially the study of an individualism that leads people into isolation.

PHILOSOPHER:It is true that the term “individual psychology,” which Adler coined, has certain aspects that may invite misunderstanding. I will explain what I mean now. First of all, etymologically speaking, the word “individual” has the meaning “indivisible.”
YOUTH:Indivisible?
PHILOSOPHER:Yes. In other words, it is the smallest possible unit and therefore cannot be broken down any further. Now, what is it exactly that cannot be divided? Adler was opposed to any kind of dualistic value system that treated the mind as separate from the body—reason as separate from emotion, or the conscious mind as separate from the unconscious mind.

YOUTH:What’s the point of that?
PHILOSOPHER:For example, do you remember the story about the female student who came to me for counseling on account of her fear of blushing? Why did she develop that fear of blushing? In Adlerian psychology, physical symptoms are not regarded separately from the mind (psyche). The mind and body are viewed as one, as a whole that cannot be divided into parts. Tension in the mind can make one’s arms and legs shake, or cause one’s cheeks to turn red, and fear can make one’s face turn white. And so on.

YOUTH:Well, sure, there are parts of the mind and body that are connected.

PHILOSOPHER:The same holds true for reason and emotion, and the conscious mind and the unconscious mind as well. A normally coolheaded person doesn’t expect to have a fit of violent emotion and start shouting at someone. We are not struck by emotions that somehow exist independently from us. Each of us is a unified whole.

YOUTH:No, that is not true. It is precisely because we have the ability to view mind and body, reason and emotion, and the conscious and the unconscious mind as clearly separate from each other that we can gain a correct understanding of people. Isn’t that a given?
PHILOSOPHER:Certainly it is true that the mind and the body are separate things, that reason and emotion are different, and that both the conscious mind and the unconscious mind exist. That said, however, when one flies into a rage and shouts at another person, it is “I as a whole” who is choosing to shout. One would never think of emotions that somehow exist independently—unrelated to one’s intentions, as it were—as having produced that shouting voice. When one separates the “I” from “emotion” and thinks, It was the emotion that made me do it,or The emotion got the best of me, and I couldn’t help it, such thinking quickly becomes a life-lie.

YOUTH:You’re referring to the time I yelled at that waiter, aren’t you?
PHILOSOPHER:Yes. This view of the human being as “I as a whole,” as an indivisible being that cannot be broken down into parts, is referred to as “holism.”
YOUTH:Well, that’s fine. But I wasn’t asking you for an academic theory to provide a definition of “individual.” Look, if you take Adlerian psychology to its logical conclusion, it’s basically saying, “I am I, and you are you,” and leading people toward isolation. It’s saying, “I won’t interfere with you, so don’t interfere with me either, and we’ll both go on living however we please.” Please tell me straightforwardly what your awareness is of that point.

PHILOSOPHER:All right. All problems are interpersonal relationship problems. You have an understanding of this basic tenet of Adlerian psychology, correct?
YOUTH:Yes, I do. The idea of noninterference in interpersonal relations, that is to say, the separation of tasks, probably came about as a way to resolve those problems.

PHILOSOPHER:This is something I believe I went over last time—that forming good interpersonal relationships requires a certain degree of distance. At the same time, people who get too close end up not even being able to speak to each other, so it is not good to get too far apart, either. Please do not think of the separation of tasks as something that is meant to keep other people away; instead, see it as a way of thinking with which to unravel the threads of the complex entanglement of one’s interpersonal relations.

YOUTH:To unravel the threads?
PHILOSOPHER:Exactly. Right now, your threads and other people’s threads are all tangled up in a confused mess, and you are looking at the world while in that condition. Red, blue, brown, and green—all the colors mixing together—you think of it as “connection.” But it is not.

YOUTH:So, then, what do you think connection is?
PHILOSOPHER:Last time, I spoke of the separation of tasks as a prescription for resolving interpersonal relationship problems. But interpersonal relationships are not something that end just because one has separated the tasks. The separating of tasks is actually the point of departure for interpersonal relations. Today, let’s take the discussion deeper and address how interpersonal relations as a whole are viewed in Adlerian psychology, and consider the kind of relationships we should form with others.The Goal of Interpersonal Relationships Is a Feeling of Community
YOUTH:Okay, I have a question. Please give me a simple answer that gets straight to the heart of the matter. You said that the separating of tasks is the point of departure for interpersonal relations. Well, what is the goal of interpersonal relations?
PHILOSOPHER:To get straight to the heart of the matter, it is “community feeling.”
YOUTH:.  .  . Community feeling?
PHILOSOPHER:Yes. This is a key concept in Adlerian psychology, and views on its application have been the subject of much debate. In fact, Adler’s proposal of the concept of community feeling drove many people to part ways with him.

YOUTH:Well, it sounds fascinating to me. What is this concept?
PHILOSOPHER:It was the time before last, I believe, that I brought up the matter of how one sees others, that is, as enemies or as comrades. Now, take that a step deeper. If other people are our comrades, and we live surrounded by them, we should be able to find in that life our own place of “refuge.” Moreover, in doing so, we should begin to have the desire to share with our comrades, to contribute to the community. This sense of others as comrades, this awareness of “having one’s own refuge,” is called “community feeling.”
YOUTH:But what part of this is open to debate? It seems like a completely irrefutable point.

PHILOSOPHER:The issue is community. What does it consist of? When you hear the word “community,” what images come to mind?
YOUTH:There are such frameworks as one’s household, school, workplace, or local society.

PHILOSOPHER:When Adler refers to community, he goes beyond the household, school, workplace, and local society, and treats it as all-inclusive, covering not only nations and all of humanity but also the entire axis of time from the past to the future—and he includes plants and animals and even inanimate objects.

YOUTH:Huh?
PHILOSOPHER:In other words, he is espousing that community is not merely one of the preexisting frameworks that the word might bring to mind but is also inclusive of literally everything—the entire universe, from the past to the future.

YOUTH:No way. Now you’ve lost me. The universe? Past and future? What on earth are you talking about?
PHILOSOPHER:The majority of those who hear this have similar doubts. This is not something one can comprehend immediately. Adler himself acknowledged that the community he was espousing was “an unattainable ideal.”
YOUTH:Ha-ha. Well, that’s perplexing, isn’t it? How about the other way around, then? Do you really comprehend and accept this community feeling, or whatever it is, that includes the entire universe?
PHILOSOPHER:I try to. Because I feel that one cannot truly comprehend Adlerian psychology without comprehending this point.

YOUTH:Okay then!
PHILOSOPHER:As I have been saying all along, Adlerian psychology has the view that all problems are interpersonal relationship problems. Interpersonal relations are the source of unhappiness. And the opposite can be said, too—interpersonal relations are the source of happiness.

YOUTH:Indeed.

PHILOSOPHER:Furthermore, community feeling is the most important index for considering a state of interpersonal relations that is happy.

YOUTH:All right. I’d like to hear all about it.

PHILOSOPHER:Community feeling is also referred to as “social interest,” that is to say, “interest in society.” So now I have a question for you: Do you know what society’s smallest unit is, from the point of view of sociology?
YOUTH:Society’s smallest unit, huh? I’d say the family.

PHILOSOPHER:No, it is “you and I.” When there are two people, society emerges in their presence, and community emerges there too. To gain an understanding of the community feeling that Adler speaks of, it is advisable to use “you and I” as the starting point.

YOUTH:And what do you do with that as the starting point?
PHILOSOPHER:You make the switch from attachment to self (self-interest) to concern for others (social interest).

YOUTH:Attachment to self? Concern for others? What’s all that about?Why Am I Only Interested in Myself?
PHILOSOPHER:Well, let’s consider this concretely. For purposes of clarity, in place of “attachment to self” I will use the word “self-centered.” In your view, someone who is self-centered is what sort of person?
YOUTH:Hmm, I guess the first thing that comes to mind is the kind of person who’s like a tyrant. Someone who’s domineering, has no qualms about being a nuisance to others, and thinks only about things that are to his own advantage. He thinks that the world revolves around him, and he behaves like a dictator who rules by absolute authority and force. He’s the kind of person who creates an enormous amount of trouble for everyone around him. Someone who’s just like Shakespeare’s King Lear, a typical tyrant.

PHILOSOPHER:I see.

YOUTH:On the other hand, he wouldn’t necessarily be a tyrant—one might speak of the sort of person who disturbs the harmony of a group as self-centered, too. He’s someone who can’t operate in a group and prefers to act alone. He never stops to reflect on his actions, even when he’s late for appointments or fails to keep his promises. In a word, he is an egotist.

PHILOSOPHER:To be sure, that is the kind of image that generally comes to mind when thinking of self-centered people. But there is another type that must be taken into account. People who are incapable of carrying out the separation of tasks and who are obsessed with the desire for recognition are also extremely self-centered.

YOUTH:Why is that?
PHILOSOPHER:Consider the reality of the desire for recognition. How much do others pay attention to you, and what is their judgment of you? That is to say, how much do they satisfy your desire? People who are obsessed with such a desire for recognition will seem to be looking at other people, while they are actually looking only at themselves. They lack concern for others and are concerned solely with the “I.” Simply put, they are self-centered.

