
YOUTH:Of course, I have different kinds of relationships. That’s how it is for everyone.

PHILOSOPHER:This is a very important point. Does one build vertical relationships, or does one build horizontal relationships? This is an issue of lifestyle, and human beings are not so clever as to be able to have different lifestyles available whenever the need arises. In other words, deciding that one is “equal to this person” or “in a hierarchical relationship with that person” does not work.

YOUTH:Do you mean that one has to choose one or the other—vertical relationships or horizontal relationships?
PHILOSOPHER:Absolutely, yes. If you are building even one vertical relationship with someone, before you even notice what is happening, you will be treating all your interpersonal relations as vertical.

YOUTH:So I am treating even my relationships with my friends as vertical?
PHILOSOPHER:That is correct. Even if you are not treating them in a boss-or-subordinate kind of way, it is as if you are saying, “A is above me, and B is below me,” for example, or “I’ll follow A’s advice, but ignore what B says,” or “I don’t mind breaking my promise to C.”
YOUTH:Hmm!
PHILOSOPHER:On the other hand, if one has managed to build a horizontal relationship with at least one person—if one has been able to build a relationship of equals in the true sense of the term—that is a major lifestyle transformation. With that breakthrough, all one’s interpersonal relations will gradually become horizontal
YOUTH:What nonsense! There are so many ways I could refute that. Think of a company setting, for example. It wouldn’t really be feasible for the director and his new recruits to form relationships as equals, would it? Hierarchical relationships are part of the system of our society, and to ignore that is to ignore the social order. Look, if you heard that a new recruit at your company, who’s only twenty or so, had suddenly started buddying up to the sixty-something director, don’t you think it would sound pretty far-fetched?
PHILOSOPHER:It is certainly important to respect one’s elders. In a company structure, it is only natural for there to be different levels of responsibility. I am not telling you to make friends with everyone, or behave as if you are close friends. Rather, what is important is to be equal in consciousness, and to assert that which needs to be asserted.

YOUTH:I am not someone who can mouth off to my seniors, and I would never think of trying. My social common sense would be called into question if I did.

PHILOSOPHER:What is “senior”? What is this “mouthing off”? If one is gauging the atmosphere of a situation and being dependent on vertical relationships, one is engaging in irresponsible acts—one is trying to avoid one’s responsibilities.

YOUTH:What is irresponsible about it?
PHILOSOPHER:Suppose that as a result of following your boss’s instructions, your work ends in failure. Whose responsibility is it then?
YOUTH:Well, that’d be my boss’s responsibility. Because I was just following orders, and he was the one who decided on them.

PHILOSOPHER:None of the responsibility is yours?
YOUTH:No, it isn’t. It’s the responsibility of the boss who gave the orders. This is what’s known as organizational accountability.

PHILOSOPHER:You are wrong. That is a life-lie. There isspace for you to refuse, and there should also be space to propose a better way of doing things. You are just thinking there is no space to refuse so that you can avoid the conflict of the associated interpersonal relations and avoid responsibility—and you are being dependent on vertical relationships.

YOUTH:Are you saying I should disobey my boss? Sure, in theory, I should. Theoretically, it’s exactly as you say. But I can’t do that! There’s no way I could build a relationship like that.

PHILOSOPHER:Really? You are building a horizontal relationship with me right now. You are asserting yourself very well. Instead of thinking about this or that difficulty, you can just start here.

YOUTH:I can start here?
PHILOSOPHER:Yes, in this small study. As I told you earlier, to me you are an irreplaceable friend.

YOUTH:
PHILOSOPHER:Am I wrong?
YOUTH:I appreciate it, I really do. But I am afraid. I am afraid of accepting your proposal.

PHILOSOPHER:What are you afraid of, exactly?
YOUTH:The tasks of friendship, naturally. I have never befriended an older man like you. I have no idea if a friend relationship with such a difference in age is even possible, or if I had better think of it as a student-teacher relationship.

PHILOSOPHER:Age does not matter in love and friendship. It is certainly true that the tasks of friendship require a steady courage. With regard to your relationship with me, it will be fine to reduce the distance little by little. To a degree of distance in which we are not in very close contact but can still reach out and touch each other’s faces with our outstretched arms, so to speak.

YOUTH:Please give me some time. Just once more, I would like some time to try to figure things out on my own. Our discussion today has given me much to think about. I would like to take it all home and ruminate on it calmly on my own.

PHILOSOPHER:It takes time to gain a true understanding of community feeling. It would be quite impossible to understand everything about it right here and now. Please return to your home and give it some careful thought, while checking it against everything else we have discussed.

YOUTH:I will. In any case, it was quite a blow to be told that I never really look at others, and I only have concern for myself. You’re really a dreadful fellow!
PHILOSOPHER:Ha-ha. You say it in such a happy way.

YOUTH:Yes, I enjoy it immensely. It hurts, of course. It’s like a sharp pain that shoots through me, as if I were swallowing needles. But still, I enjoy it immensely. It’s habit-forming, having these discussions with you. I realized a little while ago that maybe I don’t just want to take apart your argument—I want you to take apart mine, too.

PHILOSOPHER:I see. That’s an interesting analysis.

YOUTH:But don’t forget. I told you that I am going to take apart your argument and bring you to your knees, and I haven’t given up.

PHILOSOPHER:Thank you. I’ve had a good time, too. Come by whenever you’re ready to pick this back up.THE FIFTH NIGHT:To Live in Earnest in the Here and NowThe young man thought to himself, Adlerian psychology is engaged in a thorough inquiry into interpersonal relationships. And the final goal of these interpersonal relationships is community feeling. But is this really enough? Isn’t there something else that I was brought into this world to achieve? What is the meaning of life? Where am I headed, and what sort of life am I trying to lead?The more the young man thought, the more it seemed to him that his own existence had been tiny and insignificant.Excessive Self-Consciousness Stifles the Self
PHILOSOPHER:It’s been awhile, hasn’t it?
YOUTH:Yes, I last came about a month ago. I have been thinking about the meaning of community feeling since then
PHILOSOPHER:So how do you feel about it now?
YOUTH:Well, community feeling is definitely an attractive idea. The sense of belonging, that “it’s okay to be here,” for example, which we possess as a fundamental desire. I think it is a brilliant insight into our existence as social creatures.

PHILOSOPHER:It’s a brilliant insight, except  .  .  .  ?
YOUTH:Funny, you caught on right away. That’s right, I still have some issues with it. I’ll say it straight out—I have no idea what you are going on about with your references to the universe and all that, and it ends up reeking of religion from beginning to end. There’s this kind of cultish quality to it all that I just can’t shake.

PHILOSOPHER:When Adler first proposed the concept of community feeling, there was a great deal of opposition in a similar vein. People said that psychology is supposed to be a science, and here was Adler discussing the issue of worth. That sort of thing isn’t science, they said.

YOUTH:So in my own way, I tried to figure out why I couldn’t understand what you were talking about, and I’m thinking that the order of things might be the problem. You’re starting off with the universe and inanimate objects, and the past and the future and so on, so I lose track of things. Instead, one should get a firm grasp of the “I.” Next, one should contemplate one-on-one relationships. That is to say, the interpersonal relationships of “you and I.” And once one has done that, the larger community should come into view.

PHILOSOPHER:I see. That is a good order.

YOUTH:Now, the first thing I want to ask about is attachment to self. You are saying that one has to stop being attached to the “I” and make the switch to “concern for others.” I am sure it is exactly as you say—concern for others is important, I agree. But no matter what, we worry about ourselves; we look at ourselves all the time.

PHILOSOPHER:Have you thought about why we worry about ourselves?
YOUTH:I have. If I were a narcissist, for example—if I were in love with myself and constantly fascinated with myself—maybe that would simplify things. Because your instruction, “Have more concern for others,” is a perfectly sound one. But I am not a self-loving narcissist. I am a self-loathing realist. I hate who I am, and that’s exactly why I look at myself all the time. I don’t have confidence in myself, and that’s why I am excessively self-conscious.

PHILOSOPHER:At what times do you feel that you are excessively self-conscious?
YOUTH:Well, at meetings, for example, I have a hard time raising my hand and making myself heard. I think needless things, like If I ask this question, they’ll probably laugh at me,or If the point I want to make is irrelevant, I’ll get ridiculed, and so on, and I just clam up. Truthfully, I falter even when it comes to telling silly jokes in front of people. Every time, my self-consciousness kicks in and puts the brakes on, and it’s as if I’ve been straitjacketed. My self-consciousness won’t allow me to behave in an innocent way. But I don’t even have to ask for your answer. I’m sure it’ll be the same as always: Have courage. But you know, such words are of no use to me. Because this isn’t just a matter of courage.

PHILOSOPHER:I see. Last time, I gave an overview of community feeling. Today, we will dig deeper.

YOUTH:And where will that take us?
PHILOSOPHER:We will probably arrive at the question, What is happiness?
YOUTH:Oh! So happiness lies beyond community feeling?
PHILOSOPHER:There is no need to rush the answers. What we need is dialogue.

YOUTH:All right, then. So let’s get started!Not Self-Affirmation— Self-Acceptance
