YOUTH:Intriguing.

PHILOSOPHER:Some time ago, I participated in a workshop for people who stammer and their families. Do you know anyone who has a stammer?
YOUTH:Yes, there was a student at the school I went to who stuttered. That must be hard to deal with, both for the person who has it and for his family, too.

PHILOSOPHER:Why is stammering hard to deal with? The view in Adlerian psychology is that people who suffer from stammering are concerned only about their own way of speaking, and they have feelings of inferiority and see their lives as unbearably hard. And they become too self-conscious as a result and start tripping over their words more and more.

YOUTH:They are concerned only about their own way of speaking?
PHILOSOPHER:That’s right. There are not many people who will laugh at or make fun of someone when he trips over his words now and then. To use the example I just mentioned, it would probably be no more than one person in ten, at most. In any case, with the sort of foolish person who would take such an attitude, it is best to simply sever the relationship. But if one is lacking in harmony of life, one will focus only on that person and end up thinking, Everyone is laughing at me.

YOUTH:But that’s just human nature!
PHILOSOPHER:I have a reading group that meets on a regular basis, and one of the participants has a stammer. It comes out sometimes when it’s his turn to read. But not a single person there is the sort who would laugh at him for that. Everyone just sits quietly and waits in a quite natural way for the next words to come out. I am sure this is not a phenomenon that is isolated to my reading group. When one’s interpersonal relations do not go well, it cannot be blamed on a stammer or a fear of blushing or anything of the sort. Even though the problem is really that one has not attained self-acceptance or confidence in others, or contribution to others, for that matter, one is focusing on only one tiny part of things that simply should not matter and from that trying to form judgments with regard to the entire world. This is a misguided lifestyle that is lacking in harmony of life.

YOUTH:Did you actually convey such a harsh idea to people who suffer from stammering?
PHILOSOPHER:Of course. At first, there were some adverse reactions, but by the end of the three-day workshop, everyone was in deep agreement with it.

YOUTH:It certainly is a fascinating argument. But focusing on people who suffer from stammering seems like a rather special example. Could you give me any others?
PHILOSOPHER:Well, another would be the workaholic. This, too, is an example of a person who is clearly lacking in harmony of life.

YOUTH:A workaholic is? Why is that?
PHILOSOPHER:People who suffer from stammering are looking at only a part of things but judging the whole. With workaholics, the focus is solely on one specific aspect of life.

They probably try to justify that by saying, “It’s busy at work, so I don’t have enough time to think about my family.” But this is a life-lie. They are simply trying to avoid their other responsibilities by using work as an excuse. One ought to concern oneself with everything, from household chores and child-rearing to one’s friendships and hobbies and so on. Adler does not recognize ways of living in which certain aspects are unusually dominant.

YOUTH:Ah  .  .  . That’s exactly the sort of person my father was. It was just: Be a workaholic, bury yourself in your work, and produce results. And then rule over the family on the grounds that you are the breadwinner. He was a very feudalistic person.

PHILOSOPHER:In a sense, that is a way of living of refusing to acknowledge one’s life tasks. “Work” does not mean having a job at a company. Work in the home, child-rearing, contributing to the local society, hobbies, and all manner of other things are work. Companies and such are just one small part of that. A way of living that acknowledges only company work is one that is lacking in harmony of life.

YOUTH:It’s exactly as you say! And it’s not as if the family he’s supporting has any say in the matter, either. You can’t argue with your father when he growls with a violent tone of voice, “It’s thanks to me that there’s food on the table.”
PHILOSOPHER:Such a father has probably been able to recognize his own worth only on the level of acts. He works all those hours, brings in enough money to support a family, and is recognized by society—and, on that basis, he views himself as having greater worth than the other members of his family. For each and every one of us, however, there comes a time when one can no longer serve as the provider. When one gets older and reaches retirement age, for example, one may have no choice but to live off one’s pension or support from one’s children. Even when one is young, injury or poor health can lead to being unable work any longer. On such occasions, those who can accept themselves only on the level of acts are severely damaged.

YOUTH:You mean those people whose lifestyle is all about work?
PHILOSOPHER:Yes. People whose lives lack harmony.

YOUTH:In that case, I think I’m starting to get what you mean by the level of being, which you brought up last time. And I certainly haven’t given much thought to the fact that someday I won’t be able to work any longer or do anything on the level of acts.

PHILOSOPHER:Does one accept oneself on the level of acts, or on the level of being? This is truly a question that relates to the courage to be happy.You Can Be Happy Now
YOUTH:The courage to be happy. Well, let’s hear what kindof courage that should be.

PHILOSOPHER:Yes, that is an important point.

YOUTH:You say that all problems are interpersonal relationship problems. And then you turn that around and say that our happiness is to be found in our interpersonal relations, too. But I still find these aspects hard to accept. Is what human beings call happiness merely something within our good interpersonal relations? That is to say, do our lives exist for such minuscule repose and joy?
PHILOSOPHER:I have a good idea of the issues you are grappling with. The first time I attended a lecture on Adlerian psychology, the lecturer, Oscar Christensen, who was a disciple of one of Adler’s disciples, made the following statement: “Those who hear my talk today can be happy right now, this very instant. But those who do not will never be able to be happy.”
YOUTH:Wow! That’s straight from the mouth of a con man. You’re not telling me you fell for that, are you?
PHILOSOPHER:What is happiness to human beings? This is a subject that has been one of the consistent threads of philosophy since ancient times. I had always regarded psychology as nothing more than a field of philosophy, and as such had very little interest in psychology as a whole. So it was as a student of philosophy that I had concerned myself, in my own way, with the question: What is happiness? I would be remiss if I did not admit to having felt some reluctance on hearing Christensen’s words. However, at the same time that I experienced that reluctance, I realized something. I had given much deep thought to the true character of happiness. I had searched for answers. But I had not always given deep thought to the question: How can one be happy? It occurred to me then that even though I was a student of philosophy, maybe I wasn’t happy.

YOUTH:I see. So your first encounter with Adlerian psychology began with a feeling of incongruity?
PHILOSOPHER:That’s right.

YOUTH:Then, please tell me: Did you eventually become happy?
PHILOSOPHER:Of course.

YOUTH:How can you be so sure?
PHILOSOPHER:For a human being, the greatest unhappiness is not being able to like oneself. Adler came up with an extremely simple answer to address this reality. Namely, that the feeling of “I am beneficial to the community” or “I am of use to someone” is the only thing that can give one a true awareness that one has worth.

YOUTH:Do you mean the “contribution to others” you mentioned earlier?
PHILOSOPHER:Yes. And this is an important point: When we speak of contribution to others, it doesn’t matter if the contribution is not a visible one.

YOUTH:It doesn’t matter if the contribution is not a visible one?
PHILOSOPHER:You are not the one who decides if your contributions are of use. That is the task of other people, and is not an issue in which you can intervene. In principle, there is not even any way you can know whether you have really made a contribution. That is to say, when we are engaging in this contribution to others, the contribution does not have to be a visible one—all we need is the subjective sense that “I am of use to someone,” or in other words, a feeling of contribution.

YOUTH:Wait a minute! If that’s the case, then what you are calling happiness is  .  .  .

PHILOSOPHER:Do you see it now? In a word, happiness is the feeling of contribution. That is the definition of happiness.

YOUTH:But  .  .  . but that’s  .  .  .

PHILOSOPHER:Is something wrong?
YOUTH:There’s no way I can accept such a simplistic definition. Look, I’m not forgetting what you told me before. You said that even though on the level of acts, one might not be of use to anyone, on the level of being, every person is of use. But if that’s the case, according to your logic, all human beings would be happy!
PHILOSOPHER:All human beings can be happy. But it must be understood that this does not mean all human beings arehappy. Whether it is on the level of acts or on the level of being, one needs to feelthat one is of use to someone. That is to say, one needs a feeling of contribution.

YOUTH:So you are saying that the reason I am not happy is that I don’t have a feeling of contribution?
PHILOSOPHER:That is correct.

YOUTH:Then how can I get a feeling of contribution? By working? Through volunteer activities?
PHILOSOPHER:Earlier, we were talking about desire for recognition. In response to my statement that one must not seek recognition, you said that desire for recognition is a universal desire.

YOUTH:Yes, I did. But honestly, I’m still not entirely certain about this point.

PHILOSOPHER:But I am sure that the reason people seek recognition is clear to you now. People want to like themselves. They want to feel that they have worth. In order to feel that, they want a feeling of contribution that tells them “I am of use to someone.” And they seek recognition from others as an easy means for gaining that feeling of contribution.

YOUTH:You are saying that desire for recognition is a means for gaining a feeling of contribution?
PHILOSOPHER:Isn’t it so?
YOUTH:No way. That contradicts everything you’ve been saying until now. Because isn’t receiving recognition from others supposed to be a means for gaining a feeling of contribution? And then you say, “Happiness is the feeling of contribution.” If it is, then fulfilling one’s desire for recognition is directly linked with happiness, isn’t it? Ha-ha! At last, you’ve acknowledged the necessity of the desire for recognition.

PHILOSOPHER:You are forgetting an important issue. If one’s means for gaining a feeling of contribution turns out to be “being recognized by others,” in the long run, one will have no choice but to walk through life in accordance with other people’s wishes. There is no freedom in a feeling of contribution that is gained through the desire for recognition. We are beings who choose freedom while aspiring to happiness.

YOUTH:So one can have happiness only if one has freedom?
