PHILOSOPHER:Yes. Freedom as an institution may differ depending on the country, the times, or the culture. But freedom in our interpersonal relations is universal.

YOUTH:There’s no way that you will acknowledge the desire for recognition?
PHILOSOPHER:If one really has a feeling of contribution, one will no longer have any need for recognition from others. Because one will already have the real awareness that “I am of use to someone,” without needing to go out of one’s way to be acknowledged by others. In other words, a person who is obsessed with the desire for recognition does not have any community feeling yet, and has not managed to engage in self-acceptance, confidence in others, or contribution to others.

YOUTH:So if one just has community feeling, the desire for recognition will disappear?
PHILOSOPHER:Yes, it will disappear. There is no need for recognition from others.

The philosopher’s points could be summed up as follows: People can be truly aware of their worth only when they are able to feel “I am of use to someone.” However, it doesn’t matter if the contribution one makes at such a time is without any visible form. It is enough to have the subjective sense of being of use to someone, that is to say, a feeling of contribution. And then the philosopher arrives at the following conclusion: Happiness is the feeling of contribution. There certainly seemed to be aspects of the truth there. But is that really all that happiness is? Not if it’s the happiness I’m searching for!Two Paths Traveled by Those Wanting to Be “Special Beings”
YOUTH:You still have not answered my question. Maybe I could actually learn to like myself through contribution to others. Maybe I could come to feel that I have worth, that I am not a worthless being. But is that all a person needs to be happy? Having come into this world, I think that unless I am able to accomplish the sort of grand undertaking that future generations will remember me for, unless I can prove myself as “I, who am no one else but me,” I will never find true happiness. You are trying to frame everything within interpersonal relations without saying a thing about self-realizing happiness. If you ask me, that’s nothing but evasion!
PHILOSOPHER:I’m not really sure what you mean by “self-realizing happiness.” What exactly are you referring to?
YOUTH:It’s something that is different for each person. I suppose there are those who want to succeed in society and those who have more personal objectives—a researcher endeavoring to develop a wonder drug, for instance, or an artist who strives to create a satisfying body of work.

PHILOSOPHER:What is it for you?
YOUTH:I still don’t really know what I am looking for or what I’ll want to do in the future. But I know that I’ve got to do something. There’s no way I’m going to spend the rest of my days working in a university library. When I find a dream that I can devote my life to, and I attain self-realization, that’s when I’ll experience true happiness. My father was someone who buried himself in his work from day to night, and I have no idea if that was happiness to him or not. To my eyes, at least, he seemed forever busy and never happy. That is not the kind of life I want to lead.

PHILOSOPHER:All right. If you think about this point using children who engage in problem behavior as an example, it might be easier to grasp.

YOUTH:Problem behavior?
PHILOSOPHER:That’s right. First of all, we human beings have a universal desire that is referred to as “pursuit of superiority.” Do you recall our discussion of this?
YOUTH:Yes. Simply put, it’s a term that indicates “hoping to improve” and “pursuing an ideal state.”
PHILOSOPHER:There are many children who, in their early stages, try to be especially good. In particular, they obey their parents, comport themselves in a socially acceptable manner, apply themselves assiduously to their studies and in sports, and excel in extracurricular activities as well. In this way, they try to get their parents to acknowledge them. However, when being especially good does not work out—their studies or sports don’t go well, for example—they do an about-face and try to be especially bad.

YOUTH:Why do they do that?
PHILOSOPHER:Whether they are trying to be especially good, or trying to be especially bad, the goal is the same: to attract the attention of other people, get out of the “normal” condition and become a “special being.” That is their only goal.

YOUTH:Hmm. All right, please go on.

PHILOSOPHER:In any case, whether it is one’s studies or one’s participation in sports, either way one needs to make a constant effort if one is to produce any kind of significant results. But the children who try to be especially bad—that is to say, the ones who engage in problem behavior—are endeavoring to attract the attention of other people even as they continue to avoid any such healthy effort. In Adlerian psychology, this is referred to as the “pursuit of easy superiority.” Take, for example, the problem child who disrupts lessons by throwing erasers or speaking in a loud voice. He is certain to get the attention of his friends and teachers. Even if it is something that is limited to that place, he will probably succeed in becoming a special being. But that is a pursuit of easy superiority, and it is an unhealthy attitude.

YOUTH:So children who commit delinquent acts are engaging in the pursuit of easy superiority, too?
PHILOSOPHER:Yes, they are. All types of problem behavior, from refusing to attend school, to wrist cutting, to underage drinking and smoking, and so on, are forms of the pursuit of easy superiority. And your shut-in friend, whom you told me about at the beginning, is engaging in it, too. When a child engages in problem behavior, his parents and other adults rebuke him. Being rebuked, more than anything else, puts stress on the child. But even if it is in the form of rebuke, the child wants his parents’ attention. He wants to be a special being, and the form that attention takes doesn’t matter. So in a sense, it is only natural that he does not stop engaging in problem behavior, no matter how harshly he is rebuked.

YOUTH:It’s because of their rebuking that he doesn’t stop the problem behavior?
PHILOSOPHER:Exactly. Because the parents and other adults are giving him attention through the act of rebuking.

YOUTH:But previously, you spoke of the goal of problem behavior as being revenge on the parents, right? Does that connect with this in some way?
PHILOSOPHER:Yes. “Revenge” and “pursuit of easy superiority” are easily linked. One makes trouble for another person while trying at the same time to be “special.”The Courage to Be Normal
YOUTH:But how  .  .  .  ? It would be impossible for all human beings to be especially good, or anything like that, wouldn’t it? No matter what, people have their strengths and weaknesses, and there will always be differences. There’s only a handful of geniuses in the world, and not everyone is cut out to be an honors student. So for all the losers, there’s nothing for it besides being especially bad.

PHILOSOPHER:Yes, it’s that Socratic paradox, that no one desires evil. Because to children who engage in problem behavior, even violent acts and theft are accomplishments of “good.”
YOUTH:But that’s horrible! That’s a line of reasoning with no way out.

PHILOSOPHER:What Adlerian psychology emphasizes at this juncture are the words “the courage to be normal.”
YOUTH:The courage to be normal?
PHILOSOPHER:Why is it necessary to be special? Probably because one cannot accept one’s normal self. And it is precisely for this reason that when being especially good becomes a lost cause, one makes the huge leap to being especially bad—the opposite extreme. But is being normal, being ordinary, really such a bad thing? Is it something inferior? Or, in truth, isn’t everybody normal? It is necessary to think this through to its logical conclusion.

YOUTH:So are you saying that I should be normal?
PHILOSOPHER:Self-acceptance is the vital first step. If you are able to possess the courage to be normal, your way of looking at the world will change dramatically.

YOUTH:But  .  .  .

PHILOSOPHER:You are probably rejecting normality because you equate being normal with being incapable. Being normal is not being incapable. One does not need to flaunt one’s superiority.

YOUTH:Fine, I acknowledge the danger of aiming to be special. But does one really need to make the deliberate choice to be normal? If I pass my time in this world in an utterly humdrum way, if I lead a pointless life without leaving any record or memory of my existence whatsoever, am I to just be satisfied with my lot, because that’s the sort of human being I am? You’ve got to be joking. I’d abandon such a life in a second!
PHILOSOPHER:You want to be special, no matter what?
YOUTH:No! Look, accepting what you call “normal” would lead to me having to affirm my idle self! It would just be saying, “This is all I am capable of and that’s fine.” I refuse to accept such an idle way of life. Do you think that Napoleon or Alexander the Great or Einstein or Martin Luther King accepted “normal”? And how about Socrates and Plato? Not a chance! More than likely, they all lived their lives while carrying the torch of a great ideal or objective. Another Napoleon could never emerge with your line of reasoning. You are trying to rid the world of geniuses!
PHILOSOPHER:So what you are saying is that one needs lofty goals in life.

YOUTH:But that’s obvious!
“The courage to be normal”—what truly dreadful words. Are Adler and this philosopher really telling me to choose such a path? To go about my life as just another soul among the utterly ordinary, faceless masses? I’m no genius, of course. Maybe “normal” is the only choice I have. Maybe I will just have to accept my mediocre self and surrender to leading a mediocre, everyday existence. But I will fight it. Whatever happens, I will oppose this man to the bitter end. We seem to be approaching the heart of our discussion.The young man’s pulse was racing, and despite the wintry chill in the air, his clenched fists shone with sweat.Life Is a Series of Moments
PHILOSOPHER:All right. When you speak of lofty goals, I am guessing that you have an image of something like a mountain climber aiming for the top.

YOUTH:Yes, that’s right. People, myself included, aim for the top of the mountain.

PHILOSOPHER:But if life were climbing a mountain in order to reach the top, then the greater part of life would end up being “en route.” That is to say, one’s “real life” would begin with one’s trek on the mountainside, and the distance one has traveled up until that point would be a “tentative life” led by a “tentative me.”
YOUTH:I guess that’s one way of putting it. The way I am now, I am definitely an “en route” person.

PHILOSOPHER:Now, suppose you didn’t make it to the mountaintop, what would that mean for your life? With accidents and diseases and the like, people don’t always make it all the way, and mountain climbing itself is fraught with pitfalls and often ends in failure. So one’s life would be interrupted “en route,” with just this “tentative me” leading a “tentative life.” What kind of life would that be?
YOUTH:That’s  .  .  . Well, that’d be a case of getting one’s just deserts. So I didn’t have the ability, or I didn’t have the physical strength to climb a mountain, or I wasn’t lucky, or I lacked the skill—that’s all! Yes, that is a reality I am prepared to accept.

PHILOSOPHER:Adlerian psychology has a different standpoint. People who think of life as being like climbing a mountain are treating their own existences as lines. As if there is a line that started the instant one came into this world, and that continues in all manner of curves of varying sizes until it arrives at the summit, and then at long last reaches its terminus, which is death. This conception, which treats life as a kind of story, is an idea that links with Freudian etiology (the attributing of causes), and is a way of thinking that makes the greater part of life into something that is “en route.”
YOUTH:Well, what is your image of life?
PHILOSOPHER:Do not treat it as a line. Think of life as a series of dots. If you look through a magnifying glass at a solid line drawn with chalk, you will discover that what you thought was a line is actually a series of small dots. Seemingly linear existence is actually a series of dots; in other words, life is a series of moments.

YOUTH:A series of moments?
PHILOSOPHER:Yes. It is a series of moments called “now.” We can live only in the here and now. Our lives exist only in moments. Adults who do not know this attempt to impose “linear” lives onto young people. Their thinking is that staying on the conventional tracks—good university, big company, stable household—is a happy life. But life is not made up of lines or anything like that.

YOUTH:So there’s no need for life planning or career planning?
PHILOSOPHER:If life were a line, then life planning would be possible. But our lives are only a series of dots. A well-planned life is not something to be treated as necessary or unnecessary, as it is impossible.

YOUTH:Oh, nonsense! What an absurd idea!Live Like You’re Dancing
PHILOSOPHER:What is wrong with it?
YOUTH:Your argument not only denies the making of plans in life, it goes as far as to deny even making efforts. Take, for example, the life of someone who has dreamed of being a violinist ever since childhood, and who, after years of strict training, has at long last become an active member in a celebrated orchestra. Or another life, one of intensive studies that successfully leads to the passing of the bar examination and becoming a lawyer. Neither of these lives would be possible without objectives and plans.

PHILOSOPHER:So in other words, like mountain climbers aiming to reach the mountaintop, they have persevered on their paths?
YOUTH:Of course!
PHILOSOPHER:But is that really the case? Isn’t it that these people have lived each and every instant of their lives here and now? That is to say, rather than living lives that are “en route,” they are always living here and now. For example, the person who had dreams of becoming a violinist was always looking at pieces of music, and concentrating on each piece, and on each and every measure and note.
