This is Audible.
Audible.
Personal Voyage by Carl Sagan.
Performed by LeVar Burton, Anne Druyan, Seth MacFarlane, and Neil deGrasse Tyson.
Hi, this is Andrea.
It was my great honor to be the creative director of NASA's Voyager Interstellar Message, the writer-producer of the Cosmos television series, and to think and write for two decades with my late husband, Carl Sagan.
It is with enormous pleasure that I welcome you to the first audio edition of Carl's award-winning book, Cosmos.
It was first published in 1980 as a companion to the award-winning PBS television series, Cosmos, A Personal Voyage, that Carl and I wrote with astronomer Stephen Soder.
Cosmos was the best-selling science book of its time, spending 70 weeks on the New York Times bestsellers list.
A new edition of Cosmos was published in 2013 to coincide with the second season of the television series, Cosmos, A Spacetime Odyssey.
But in all that time, there was never an audio book, until now.
So why now?
Carl believed, as do I, that science belongs to everyone, not just because it reveals such a magnificent cosmos, but also because it is critical to our dreams of having a truly democratic society.
Our civilization depends on science and high technology, and yet most of us are effectively excluded from the language, values, and methods of science.
For us, that seemed then, and for me, even more so now, like a recipe for disaster.
Audiobooks have become a growing medium in the publishing world, and a powerful tool for literacy as well.
Listening is reading, and the ear is proving to be as strong a pathway to the mind as the eye.
That is the reason you are listening to Cosmos for the first time.
Science is a permanent revolution.
It never stops moving forward, in its quest for a sharper, more accurate picture of reality.
No single insight in this search is sacred, only the searching.
The decades that have passed since the publication of this book have been arguably the most eventful in the history of science.
And yet, with a few exceptions, for example, in the precise age of the universe, this cosmos still stands up, not just as an accurate reflection of the grandeur of nature, but in many ways, as a work of prophecy.
The scientific community has arrived at consensus on climate change, and on many of the ideas, once deemed outrageously speculative, contained herein.
As you embark on this voyage, you'll be joining nearly a billion other of your fellow Earthlings in the great adventure of becoming a way for the cosmos to know itself, and the next link in the generations of searchers.
For Andruyan
In the vastness of space and the immensity of time, it is my joy to share a planet and an epoch with Annie.
Reflections on Carl Sagan's Cosmos
By me, Neil deGrasse Tyson
Not everyone who successfully impacts the hearts and minds of one generation will carry that currency of influence into the generations that follow.
The continued success of Cosmos, Carl Sagan's magnum opus, argues strongly for Carl's affability and intelligence.
But it also reveals a hidden hunger in us all to learn about our place in the universe and embrace why that matters intellectually, culturally, and emotionally.
These properties distinguish the work of Carl Sagan and his collaborators from all other efforts to communicate science.
Most good books in the genre teach you what to know in the author's field of expertise, what's hot, what's interesting, and clear in simple language.
But rarely is that information shaped into knowledge, and even more rarely is that knowledge shaped into wonder, the foundation of a cosmos perspective on the world.
Dare I assert that cosmos wielded this power in ways that profoundly influenced how we would observe, interpret, and conduct our lives?
One of the least noted facts about cosmos, but perhaps its most significant gift to human culture, is how it repeatedly cross-pollinated traditional sciences.
Astronomy, biology, chemistry, geology.
When taken separately, each of these fields is noble and time-honored.
But when taken together, when cosmos wove them into a tapestry of insight on our place in the universe, their juxtaposition became potent and indelible.
Cosmos was early, if not first, in this endeavor.
In the decades that followed its publication, we would see the rise of hybrid fields of study, such as astrobiology, astroparticle physics, astrochemistry, planetary geology.
Some still donning their hyphens.
But the publication and best-selling success of cosmos accomplished much more than this.
The book's treatment of scientific topics was persistently blended with other traditional fields of study, such as history, anthropology, art, and philosophy,
to reveal for the first time how and why readers should embrace all the ways that science matters in our culture.
At the time, there was nothing fresher, more uplifting, or more empowering than the themes and messages of cosmos.
Perhaps for the first time in any medium, the person teaching you science, Carl Sagan, cared about the tangled mental roadways that can rob a person of rational thought.
His motif was to speak with you, not lecture at you.
With that level of pedagogical comfort, millions of people around the world invited his television image into their living rooms and his printed words into their reading chairs.
When cosmos first arrived in 1980, the arms race of the Cold War was fading, but nonetheless continued to hold hostage the world's nations with a nuclear arsenal of destructive powers derived from the minds of physicists.
But exploration was not without hope.
NASA had already landed Viking on Mars, seven years after we walked on the moon, and the twin Voyager space probes continued their fly-by tour of the Jovian planets, on their way out of the solar system altogether.
All headline news, but much more was to come.
The space shuttle had not yet flown.
The International Space Station existed only on paper.
However, the Hubble Space Telescope was 11 years from launch.
The first exoplanets, world's orbiting suns other than our own, were 15 years from detection.
The World Wide Web was still a decade from becoming a household utility, democratizing access to cosmic discoveries.
And dozens more space missions would launch and arrive at their respective destinations.
In a field that moves as rapidly as astrophysics, one would think it impossible to write a timeless tract on it.
But within cosmos, you're never focused on the bleeding edge of science.
That comes and goes.
You're instead treated to what the epic adventure of scientific inquiry means to Earth, to our species, to you.
And that recipe works at any time, in any place, for any generation.
Forward, written and read by Anne Trean.
I once stood on the shores of the cosmic ocean with Carl Sagan.
Thirty-five years ago, we shivered in the sunshine on the wind-whipped Monterey cliffs of northern California's Pacific coast with our co-writer, astronomer Stephen Soder, and a small television crew.
It was a struggle to wrangle the wildly flapping two-foot-long galley pages of this book while trying to keep hold of the cardboard cue cards that Steve and I had prepared for Carl for the television show.
The book and its original 1980 companion television series were created simultaneously in a three-year-long frenzy, although each contains passages and sequences not found in the other.
The pages of script and manuscript were one of a kind back in those relatively low-tech days.
With every gust coming off the light-dazzled waves, the pages threatened to take flight and blow out to sea, like the dandelion puffball.
