Mathematics in Home Construction
The Perfect Manhole Cover
Design Your Own Coffee-Cup Sleeve!
How to Optimally Wrap a Present
CHAPTER 4: PROBABILITY, GAMES, AND GAMBLING
Friday the Thirteenth!
Unexpected Birthday Matches
Selecting Clothes
Playing Cards, a Counterintuitive Probability
Mathematics in Poker
Mathematical Logic of Tic-Tac-Toe
The Monty Hall Problem
Business Applications
Mathematics of Life Insurance
The Most Misunderstood Average
What We Need to Know about Averages
Comparing Measures of Central Tendency
CHAPTER 5: SPORTS AND GAMES—EXPLAINED
MATHEMATICALLY
The Best Angle to Throw a Ball
Optimizing Your Shot at Soccer
A Game of Angles
Playing Billiards Cleverly

Mathematics on a Bicycle
The Spirograph Toy
CHAPTER 6: THE WORLD AND ITS NATURE
Measures of and on the Earth
Navigating the Globe
What Is Relativity?
Coloring a Map
Crossing Bridges
Mathematics in Nature
The Male Bee's Family Tree
Fibonacci Numbers in the Plant World
The Pine Cone and Others
Leaf Arrangement—Phyllotaxis
The Fibonacci Numbers on the Human Body
The Geometry of Rainbows
CHAPTER 7: APPEARANCES OF MATHEMATICS IN ART AND
ARCHITECTURE
Golden Ratio Sightings
Displaying a Watch
Applications in Art
Perspectivity in Art
Numbers in Art
Viewing a Statue Optimally
The Most Overlooked Curve
The One-Sided Belt—the Möbius Strip
CHAPTER 8: THE TECHNOLOGY AROUND US—FROM A
MATHEMATICAL PERSPECTIVE
A Fascination with the Clock
The Mathematics of Paper Folding
Building a Skewed Tower
Whispering Galleries
Looking inside a Flashlight
Coffee with Caustics

Green Traffic Lights All the Way
Safety in Numbers
The ISBN System
How the Global Positioning System (GPS) Works
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
NOTES
INDEX

We hear so often that mathematics is important for us to better appreciate the
world around us. This is the book that will guide you through a wide variety of
aspects of our world that are accompanied by mathematical explanations.
Unfortunately, because of restricted curriculum guidelines, your teachers and
school probably did not have the time to navigate the many excursions that we
will be presenting here. Had they been able to enrich mathematics instruction
through these many applications, your math instruction would have been much
more enjoyable. Teachers are strictly directed by curriculum guidelines to cover
topics considered essential foundation blocks for further study in mathematics as
well as the other STEM fields. This is compounded even more so in many
schools where teachers are rated by the scores that their students achieve on
standardized tests. Hence, there is a lot of “teaching to the test” and very little
beyond that. In this book, we plan to dispel the very popular notion that
mathematics is tedious and boring. We will be presenting a host of topics and
ideas you are unlikely to have encountered during your school instruction, and
they will give you a true feeling of how mathematics is a part of our everyday
lives and how it can be used to explain many of the concepts we experience, the
things we see, the decisions we make, and the overall understanding we have of
the world around us.
Most people experience mathematics in a formal sense during their school
years. All too often, mathematics is presented as a collection of mechanical
techniques that supposedly allow the learner to apply these methods and
concepts to a variety of encounters in everyday life. But the lifestyles and
interests of the general populace vary broadly. Compound that with the lack of
applications in the curriculum, and the average person is left with the feeling that
he or she learns mathematics because it had to be learned and not because it is
useful. In this book, we hope to convince you not only that mathematics is
useful, but also that it can help us explain many things in everyday life that we
tend to take for granted—and in unexpected ways.
There are people who feel that they can explain the world through
mathematics. Oftentimes there may be a bit of a “stretch” in such explanations.

Yet there are numerous parts of our experiential world that are based on
mathematical concepts and principles. These can be appreciated in a variety of
