forms of art, architecture, nature, and finance; further, the daily aspects of our
culture and lifestyles have mathematical explanations, or even mathematical
origins. Most people are unaware as they confront these things that simple
mathematics is being applied or can be used to better explain what is being
observed.
As mentioned above, mathematical applications can be found in art and
architecture, where the proportions of pictures, their subjects, and the nature of
the structures themselves can be explained with well-established mathematical
relationships. The golden ratio, which shows its tested beauty on the dimensions
of the golden rectangle, is used throughout art and architecture. The structures
that have for centuries become icons in our society—such as famous cathedrals,
the Parthenon, the pyramids in Egypt—and other notable structures, even those
built in modern times—such as the Headquarters of the United Nations in New
York—all exhibit the beautiful golden ratio.
Additionally, for paintings to convey proper depth perception, lines of
perspectivity also must come into play; we can see this in Leonardo da Vinci's
famous The Last Supper mural in Milan, Italy, for example. Through their
drawings and paintings, well-known artists have demonstrated their awareness of
mathematical concepts. Notably among these is the famous German artist
Albrecht Dürer, who studied Leonardo's techniques and used them in some of his
drawings. He also showed a keen awareness of mathematics in his 1514 etching
Melencolia I, in which he included an incredibly rich magic square that has
many properties beyond those of normal magic squares. We hope to give you the
tools you need to appreciate art and architecture from a mathematical standpoint,
as well as an aesthetic one.
Perhaps the most ubiquitous numbers in mathematics are the Fibonacci
numbers, which continuously arise in just about every aspect of our lives. For
example, in nature the numbers of spirals on pine cones and pineapples are
always Fibonacci numbers, as is the arrangement of the branches on a pear tree.
You'll have to read on to learn about even more amazing appearances and
applications of the Fibonacci numbers. (By the way, the Fibonacci numbers can
also generate the golden ratio!)
Beyond art and the natural world, there are also unexpected, curious
mathematical explanations for understanding excellence in sports. For example,
you can use very simple high-school geometry to determine the optimal point
along the sideline of a soccer field from which to shoot a goal. You can also use
simple geometry in billiards to easily determine the point at which to hit a ball

with the cue so that it hits a cushion and ricochets onto another cushion or ball.
You might not think about this when playing a game of billiards for fun with
your friends, but this is just another example of how math is all around you.
As you know, we all do lots of calculating and estimating in the course of our
everyday lives. But you will be surprised, and perhaps entertained, by the many
shortcuts and unusual relationships that can be used to make these tasks almost
trivial, such as when converting miles to and from kilometers. We will present a
variety of useful shopping shortcuts, investment insights, even how best to wrap
a present!
Mathematics can help you navigate the globe and even appreciate and
understand rainbows and the other curves that we encounter. For instance, when
you travel along a road with timed traffic lights, mathematics can explain how
this is done. Have you ever wondered why all sewer covers are round? That, too,
will be explained. There are curves that enable us to have whispering galleries,
and curves that hold up bridges. All of these are special properties that can be
explained very easily through elementary mathematics.
The field of probability allows us insight into some unusual aspects of reality,
too. It is clearly to a gambler's advantage to understand concepts of probability,
for oftentimes a correct assessment of a wagering situation can be quite
counterintuitive. There are game shows on television, most notably Let's Make a
Deal, that have been a hot topic of controversy regarding how to determine the
best strategy to win the game. Probability can also affect your worldview,
particularly when you are reading a newspaper and journalists enthusiastically
offer statistical evidence to support a position; at this point, knowledge of
probability concepts can be helpful not only to understand the presented material
but also to criticize it intelligently. We hope to enlighten you in this regard. We
will also provide some curious insights into the card game of poker.
As you will see, mathematical problem-solving strategies are often used in
everyday life. For example, using extremes to solve certain problems can be very
effective not only in mathematics, but also with issues we face regularly. When
confronted with a decision to be made, we say to ourselves, “Well, in the worst-
case scenario, such and such would be the case.” This allows us to move ahead
with a sensible procedure for dealing with the situation at hand. Mathematical
problem-solving strategies can guide us in the way we think about common,
everyday decisions to be made.
These are just a few of the plethora of mathematical applications in our
everyday lives. Often, we are not even aware that mathematics can explain and
facilitate an understanding of what we see and how we can best deal with these
situations. The mathematical concepts we consider in this book will require

nothing more than a recollection of what you had been taught up to the tenth
grade in high school. Join us now as we begin our journey through an
investigation of a wealth of topics that either depend on mathematics or can use
mathematics to explain their functioning, or, perhaps, even allow us to appreciate
the world around us in an enhanced, sophisticated fashion because now many
things we may have just accepted without question will become more
meaningful.

As we begin our exploration of the many obvious, and less obvious, occurrences
of mathematics in our daily experiences, it would only be fitting that we begin
with some of the historical highlights of where our mathematical usage began. It
is well-known that the earliest uses of mathematics were portrayed with symbols
of different kinds than what is used today. Best known is the use of hieroglyphics
in the ancient Egyptian world. We still see today many applications of roman
numerals—on cornerstones of buildings, on some clock or wristwatch faces,
some preliminary book pages, and so on. Yet the most common use of symbols
is the set of the 10 digits we use to represent numbers in the base-10, which
originated in India. Let's first consider the origin of numbers so that we can
better appreciate those that we use today.
THE ORIGIN OF OUR NUMBER SYMBOLS
Concepts for the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,…can be traced back to the origins of
human history. Representations of these numbers must have arisen naturally as
