known today as Fibonacci. As mentioned above, Fibonacci wrote a book called
Liber Abaci. It contained many mathematical problems, and the first words of its
introduction were:
The nine Indian figures are: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1.
With these nine figures, and with the sign 0, which the Arabs call zephyr, any number whatsoever is
written, as demonstrated below. A number is a sum of units, and through the addition of them the
number increases by steps without end. First one composes those numbers, which are from one to
ten. Second, from the tens are made those numbers, which are from ten up to one hundred. Third,
from the hundreds are made those numbers, which are from one hundred up to one thousand…. And
thus, by an unending sequence of steps, any number whatsoever is constructed by joining the
preceding numbers. The first place in the writing of the numbers is at the right. The second follows
the first to the left….5
Fibonacci encountered these numbers during his travels on the Barbary Coast
of Africa, where he worked closely with Arab mathematicians. Today, these
numerals are referred to as Hindu-Arabic numerals, depicting their path to
Europe. Despite their relative facility, these numerals were not widely accepted
by merchants who were suspicious of those who knew how to use them. Such
merchants were simply afraid of being cheated. The numerals first began to be
used fifty years after the publication of Fibonacci's book, but still not very
extensively. We can safely say that it took the same three hundred years for these
numerals to catch on as it did for the leaning tower of Pisa to be completed.
Interestingly, Liber Abaci also contains simultaneous linear equations. Many
of the problems that Fibonacci considers, however, were similar to those
appearing in Arab sources. This does not detract from the value of the book,
since it is the collection of solutions to these problems that makes it a major
contribution to our development of mathematics. As a matter of fact, a number
of mathematical terms—common in today's usage—were first introduced in
Liber Abaci. Fibonacci referred to factus ex multiplicatione, and from this first
sighting of the phrase, we now speak of the “factors of a number” or the “factors
of a multiplication.” Another example of words whose introduction into the
current mathematics vocabulary seems to stem from this famous book are
“numerator” and “denominator.”
Before we go further with these common numerals, it is worthwhile to see
what predated them. This we will see when we look at the ancient Egyptian

number system.
ARITHMETIC IN ANCIENT EGYPT
In 1858, the young Scottish lawyer Alexander Henry Rhind (1833–1863)
purchased a papyrus that was found during illegal excavations in the Theban
Necropolis, which lies within the modern Egyptian city of Luxor. This papyrus
turned out to be one of the oldest documents of written mathematics, and, to this
day, it is the main source of our knowledge about ancient Egyptian mathematics.
The papyrus dates to around 1650 BCE, and in the opening paragraph, the scribe
states that he is copying a text from the reign of King Amenemhat III. The
original text, which is now lost, must have been even a few hundred years older.
Figure 1.3.
Today, the so-called Rhind Mathematical Papyrus (fig. 1.3) is kept at the
British Museum in London, but some small fragments are held by the Brooklyn
Museum in New York. The text contains a collection of eighty-seven problems
in arithmetic, algebra, and geometry. As a matter of fact, it showed that the
ancient Egyptians had calculated the value of π as 3.1605, which is less than 1
percent off from the actual value.6 The Rhind Papyrus gives us insight into the
mathematical knowledge in ancient Egypt, as well as providing us with explicit
calculations, such as demonstrating how multiplication and division were carried
out. This is particularly interesting because of the way that computation methods
in ancient civilizations differ from the modern algorithms for multiplication and
division that we use today. The ancient Egyptians used a systematic method for

multiplying two numbers that only requires the ability to multiply and divide by
2, and to add.
For instance, to find the product of 19 and 34 with this method, we would first
create a two-column table, writing 1 in the first column and one of the
multiplicands, say, 34, in the first row of the second column. (A multiplicand is a
number that is going to be multiplied by another; in this example, then, the
multiplicands are 19 and 34.) We obtain each line in the first column by doubling
the preceding line. Thus, the first column will contain a sequence of powers of 2
and the second column will contain a doubling sequence of 34. We proceed until
the sequence in the first column arrives at a number that allows us to get a sum
from the numbers in the first column that is equal to the other multiplicand, 19.
This would be the largest number in the representation of 19 into the sum of
powers of 2, that is, 19 = 24 + 21 + 20 = 16 + 2 + 1. We now highlight (in
boldface) the corresponding rows in the table, as shown in table 1.1.
Powers of 2 Contained in 19
Doublings of 34
1
34
2
68
 4 
 136 
 8 
272
16
544
Sum: 19
Sum: 646
Table 1.1. Ancient Egyptian multiplication method.
By adding the appropriate terms (in boldface) in the doubling sequence, we
find the full product, that is, 19 · 34 = 544 + 68 + 34 = 646. It does not matter
which of the multiplicands we decompose into powers of 2. However, it might
be wise to take the one with the shorter decomposition, since this implies that we
have fewer numbers to add. Table 1.2 shows the alternative variant of computing
the product 19·34. Here we list the powers of 2 in the first column until we reach
a number that allows us to create a sum equal 34. Here we see that 32 + 2 = 34.
Taking the corresponding numbers in the second column, we find that 38 + 608
= 46.
Powers of 2 Contained in 34
Doublings of 19
 1 
 19 
