 2 
38
 4 
 76 
 8 
152

 16 
 304 
32
608
Sum: 34
Sum: 646
Table 1.2. Ancient Egyptian multiplication method.
A shorter decomposition of one multiplicand means that we have to double the
other multiplicand more often (since a shorter decomposition will necessarily
involve higher powers of 2), so there is actually not that much work to be saved.
The most remarkable fact about the ancient Egyptians’ arithmetic is their very
special way of calculating with fractions. Only fractions of the form  were used,
with the exception of ⅔ (and, very rarely, ¾). There was not even a notation for
other fractions! All fractions they had to deal with (typically as the results of
divisions) were expressed as sums of unit fractions (each having numerator 1).
Moreover, all of the unit fractions in such a sum had to be different! For
example, the fraction  was not represented as 
 but as 
 To see that this is
equal to  we rewrite 
 with common denominators and compute the sum: 
 The Rhind Papyrus contains a table of representations of  as sums
of distinct unit fractions for odd n between 5 and 101. Table 1.3 shows the first
twenty-four unit-fraction expansions in the table on the Rhind Papyrus.
Table 1.3. Unit fraction expansions found in the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus.
The decompositions are not unique; for example, here are several such
representations for the fraction  as follows: 
 It is known neither
why the ancient Egyptians almost exclusively used unit fractions, nor how they
found their representations. A partial answer to the first question could be that
decompositions into unit fractions are sometimes very practical if a certain

quantity of goods would have to be split into equal parts. For instance, one of the
first problems on the Rhind Papyrus asks how to divide 7 loaves of bread
between 10 men. Converting 
 into a decimal number would not be of any use
here. Cutting each loaf into 10 equal slices and giving 7 slices to each person
produces a large number of slices and a lot of unnecessary crumbs as waste.
However, by expanding 
 into a sum of unit fractions, we obtain 
 Hence,
everyone gets half a loaf and an extra fifth of a loaf. This is a much more
efficient way of sharing 7 loaves between 10 people!
Today, mathematicians use the term “Egyptian fraction” for any sum of
several distinct unit fractions. Although we do not know how the ancient
Egyptians found their unit-fraction representations, there exist various
algorithms to expand an arbitrary fraction in terms of an Egyptian fraction. The
first published methods to construct Egyptian fractions were found in Fibonacci's
book Liber Abaci. One of the methods he describes is now known as the “greedy
algorithm for Egyptian fractions”7 and we will demonstrate how it works by
showing an example. Consider the fraction 
 To get the first term in the
expansion, we seek the largest unit fraction smaller than 
 Therefore, we
increase the denominator until the fraction becomes reducible to a unit fraction.
The first denominator increases  and  are not reducible to unit fractions, but
the next one, 
 This gives us ¼ as the first term in our expansion. To get the
next term, we subtract ¼ from  and repeat the procedure; that is, we determine
the largest unit fraction smaller than or equal to the remainder, 
 then subtract
and repeat “the greedy algorithm,” so called because one always takes away the
largest unit fraction contained in the remainder. Here we would obtain 
 Continuing our earlier procedure, we find the next higher-
denominator fraction, 
 which is the largest unit fraction we can subtract
from the remainder. This leads to 
 and now we are done, since
the remainder is already a unit fraction. We obtained the Egyptian fraction
expansion 
 The algorithm will always come to an end, since each step
reduces the numerator of the remaining fraction to be expanded. However, this
method does not necessarily produce the shortest possible expansion. Actually, it
will often produce expansions that are longer than the ancient Egyptians’
expansions, or it will contain larger denominators. For example, using the greedy
algorithm to expand  yields 
 involving a much larger denominator than the
ancient Egyptian representation 
 Interestingly, no general algorithm is
known for producing unit-fraction representations that have either a minimum
number of terms or the smallest possible denominators.
For some special cases there exist shortcuts to obtain a unit-fraction

expansion. One of these special situations is when you are given an irreducible
fraction with numerator 2. An irreducible fraction of the form  can always be
written as 
 where p and q are odd numbers, one of which may be 1 (if one or
both of them were even, then 
 would be reducible). We then have the
decomposition
where 
 must be an integer, since p + q is even. One way to see this is to divide
the identity 
