 by pq, leading to 
 which yields the proposed
decomposition upon multiplication by 2 (which we represent on the right-hand
side of the equation as dividing the denominator by 2). Notice that since we may
also multiply by another number than 2, we would get an analogous
decomposition for fractions of the form 
 whenever p + q is divisible by n.
This method will always work for irreducible fractions with numerator 2. As an
example, we may consider 
 for which the decomposition yields
You may have noticed that this is already the third Egyptian fraction
expansion for  presented above. Actually, there always exist infinitely many
Egyptian fraction expansions for any given fraction. To see this, notice that
every unit fraction can itself be expanded into other unit fractions by means of
the identity
For example, 
 and 
 and so on. Thus, using this identity, we can
construct arbitrarily long chains of unit fractions equal to a given fraction. This
implies that there must exist infinitely many Egyptian fractions representing the
same fractional number. A much more difficult question to ask is: How many
Egyptian fractions of a given length does a given fractional number have? In
1948, the famous Hungarian mathematician Paul Erdös (1913–1996), together
with the German-American mathematician Ernst Straus (1922–1983),8
conjectured that for every integer n ≥ 2, the fraction  has an Egyptian fraction
expansion of length 3, meaning that there exist three positive integers a, b, and c
such that 
 This is one of several open problems on Egyptian fractions in
number theory. It is quite charming that the ancient Egyptians’ curious way of
representing fractions generates some mathematical problems that are still
unsolved today.

WHERE THE TERMS RELATED TO OUR CLOCK EVOLVE
Have you ever wondered why an hour is divided into 60 minutes and a minute
into 60 seconds? The word “minute” comes from the Latin pars minuta prima,
meaning “first small part,” and the word “second” has its origin in the Latin pars
minuta secunda, meaning “second small part.” Thus, a minute is the “primary
minute division” of an hour, and it is further divided into seconds, the
“secondary minute divisions.”
A MINUTE HISTORY OF TIMEKEEPING
In fact, minutes were not considered by the general public until the end of the
seventeenth century. Although some clocks built in the fifteenth century already
indicated minutes and seconds, such elaborate instruments were very rare, and
their accuracy was poor. Most clocks from that time only had an hour hand. In
1656, the Dutch mathematician and physicist Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695)
invented the pendulum clock, a crucial step in the history of timekeeping
devices.9 He was able to build clocks that erred by less than one minute per day.
The accuracy of pendulum clocks was further improved by the invention of the
anchor escapement, probably by the British physicist Robert Hooke (1635–
1703).10 An escapement is a mechanism that turns the clock's wheels by a fixed
angle with each swing of the pendulum, thereby moving the clock's hands
forward. The anchor escapement reduced the required amplitude of the swing of
the pendulum from about 100° to only 5°, thus allowing for pendulums to be
much longer and to swing at a slower rate. With the resulting improvement in
accuracy, around 1680–1690 the minute hand became standard in pendulum
clocks. Finally, the invention of the balance spring, attributed to both Christiaan
Huygens and Robert Hooke, made it possible to build reasonably accurate and
slim clocks, enabling the production of pocket watches displaying minutes, and
eventually also seconds.11
But why is an hour divided into 60 minutes and not, as might be expected, 10
or 100 minutes, using numbers of our base-10 system? Although the historical
origin of a division into 60 parts could never be fully clarified, it most probably
derives from the sexagesimal system, a numeral system based on the number 60
that was developed in Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) around 2000 BCE. Before we
explore the clock further, let's examine the sexagesimal system.

BABYLONIAN MATHEMATICS AND THE SEXAGESIMAL SYSTEM
Any mathematics that originated in the ancient Mesopotamia is now referred to
as Babylonian mathematics, deriving its name from the city of Babylon, which
was an intellectual center and important place of study from its rise around 1900
BCE to its fall in 539 BCE. The Babylonians wrote on clay tablets, which were
baked in an oven or dried in the sun. Some of the earliest evidence of written
mathematics is Plimpton 322 (see fig. 1.4), a Babylonian clay tablet in the
Plimpton Collection at Columbia University in New York.
Figure 1.4.
The tablet was written in cuneiform script and lists what are now called
Pythagorean triples, that is, integers a, b, and c satisfying the famous
Pythagorean theorem: a2 + b2 = c2. The Babylonian numeral system was a
sexagesimal system (again, based on the number 60), and, as far as we know
today, it was the first true place-value system in the history of mathematics.
Today we are using a decimal system, a place-value system based on the number
10, not the number 60. If a place-value system is used to represent a number, the
value of a particular digit depends on both the digit itself and its position within
the number (for example, 225 = 2 · 100 + 2 · 10 + 5 · 1). Without a place-value
system, each power of the base has to be represented by a unique symbol,
making calculations quite cumbersome. The Romans, for instance, had numerals
based on 10, but they did not use a place-value system and denoted 1, 10, 100,
and 1000 by the symbols I, X, C, and M (as well as one-half of 10 with a V, one-
half of 100 with an L, and one-half of 1,000 with a D). In the Babylonian

system, the same symbol was used for the numbers 1, 60, 602, 603, and so on.
The position of the symbol within a number determined which power of 60 it
represented. This is an improvement when compared to the Roman system, for
example, but it still had its drawbacks. For example, since the Babylonians did
not have a concept of the number zero (and hence also no digit for zero), the
very same symbol could stand for 1 or 60 or any other power of 60, depending
on the context. Knowing the context of a mathematical text was, therefore,
crucial for interpreting numbers correctly.
Figure 1.5.
As can be seen in figure 1.5, all 59 Babylonian non-zero digits were
