composed of at most two symbols. In order to facilitate the notation for the 59
different digits needed, an internal decimal system was used, similar to roman
numerals (see fig. 1.5), but the place values in a digit string were always based
on 60. The internal decimal notation for digits indicates that the Babylonians
might also have experimented with a decimal place-value system before they
decided to work with a sexagesimal system. But what is so special about the
number 60? Why did the Babylonians base their arithmetic on 60 and not on 10
or any other number? In contrast to 10, the number 60 is a so-called highly
composite number, which is a positive integer that has more divisors than any
other smaller positive integer. The number 60 is divisible by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 12,
15, 20, and 30. It is also the smallest number divisible by the first six counting
numbers. This implies that the corresponding fractions 
 can all be
expressed by a single digit in the sexagesimal place-value system, whereas in the
decimal system, only the fractions 
 and 
 have such a simple
representation. The fractions 
 and 
 do not even have a finite decimal

representation. The divisibility of 60 by 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 was very helpful for
trading, especially since ancient Mesopotamian units of measurement were
based on integer factors of 60. Table 1.4 lists the basic units of length, area, and
mass, together with their respective ratios.
Table 1.4.
Considering mass units, for instance, the fractional parts 
 of a pound
would correspond to 30, 20, 15, 12, and 10 shekels. Similarly, the fractional
parts 
 of a foot would correspond to 10, 5, and 4 fingers. It is quite obvious
that the sexagesimal system is notably convenient for expressing fractions.
BABYLONIAN MINUTES AND SECONDS HAVE SURVIVED TO THIS
DAY
Let's return to our inspection of the clock. The divisibility properties of 60 are
also practical for measuring time, given that a day is divided into two 12-hour
cycles (stemming from the ancient Egyptians). A 12-hour clock dial can be
evenly divided into 60 minutes and can, therefore, be used to simultaneously
display hours and minutes. Interestingly, during the French revolution in 1793,
the French republicans wanted to introduce a decimal time system, dividing the
day into 10 decimal hours, each consisting of 100 decimal minutes, which were
divided into 100 decimal seconds.12 However, the plan was abandoned a few
years later, since it was not very well received by the general public. France
started another attempt toward a decimalization of time measures in 1897, when
the Commission de décimalisation du temps was founded, whose secretary was
the famous mathematician Henri Poincaré (1854–1912).13 This time a
compromise was pursued, retaining the 24-hour day, but dividing each hour into
100 decimal minutes, and each minute into 100 seconds. Once again, this
undertaking was given up a few years later, since it did not gain very much
acceptance. As a consequence, to the present day, the sexagesimal system has
survived as our measurement of time. Sticking to a system to which we are all
accustomed might be just a force of habit, but perhaps the nice and unique

divisibility properties of 60 somehow appeal to us as they must have to the
Babylonians.
We are all aware that there is another numeral system that still plays a minor
role in our society and was originally developed by the Romans. Since we
encounter it in our everyday lives, we ought to take note of how it evolved and
survived so long.
ROMAN NUMERALS ARE EVERYWHERE AROUND US
Football fans may have noticed that the 50th Super Bowl, played in February
2016, was branded with a logo that looked quite different from the Super Bowl
logos that were used in prior years. While Super Bowls are usually numbered in
roman numerals (a practice established at Super Bowl V in 1971), the National
Football League broke with that tradition and went with arabic numerals for
Super Bowl 50. In roman numerals, the letter L represents the number 50, so it
would have been “Super Bowl L,” using roman numerals. The NFL explained
that the primary reason for the change was the difficulty in designing an
aesthetically pleasing logo for “Super Bowl L.”14 But why did they use roman
numerals in the first place, more than 1500 years after the fall of the Roman
Empire?
Although roman numerals survived the Roman Empire by almost a
millennium and remained common in Europe throughout the Middle Ages, they
were eventually almost completely replaced by the more convenient Hindu-
Arabic numerals during the Renaissance in Europe. However, we all know that
in certain contexts, roman numerals are still being used today. Hour marks on
clock faces are very often labeled with roman numerals; in the credits of films,
the year of production is frequently written in roman numerals; and roman
numerals can be seen on the corner stones of public buildings, monuments, and
gravestones. Monarchs are usually numbered in roman, for example, Henry VIII
and Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom. Roman numerals are also used as
generational suffixes for persons who share the same name within a family, such
as Harry Phillips III. You will find roman numerals on the front page of the New
York Times, indicating the volume number; and as lower-case letters they are
sometimes used for the preliminary pages of books before the main page
numbering begins. The most prominent use of roman numerals in the world of
sports is for the modern Olympic Games. For instance, the 1996 Summer
Olympics in Atlanta, Georgia, are officially known as the “Games of the XXVI
Olympiad.” The numbering is useful both to distinguish between different events

and also to know how many Olympic Games have already taken place (since the
first modern Olympic Games in 1896). This was also the reason for numbering
the Super Bowl events, and roman numerals were probably used to give them
more of an “official character” and make the game seem more prestigious and
dignified, comparable to the Olympic Games. However, unlike the Olympic
Games, the Super Bowl is an annual event, and larger numbers tend to get longer
and more complex to read when using roman numerals. So, in spite of the fact
that the NFL returned to roman numerals for Super Bowl LI in 2017, this might
not be the last word spoken on this issue.
Let's examine how roman numerals function. They are based on seven
