symbols, each of which represents a fixed value:
Numbers are formed by combining these symbols and adding the values. It
might be interesting to note that the symbol for 5 is V, which is the top half of X
—the symbol for 10. Symbols are placed from left to right in order of value,
with the largest at the beginning. To convert a number into Roman numerals, we
remove the largest roman values, write down the corresponding numerals, and
continue with the remainder until the entire value is converted. As an example,
consider 476, the year in which the regency of the last Roman emperor ended.
The largest roman values we can begin with are four Cs, so we write down
CCCC, representing 400, which leaves a remainder of 76. Now we can cover the
50 from the remaining 76 with L, to obtain CCCCL, representing 450. The
remainder to be covered is 26, which can be written as two Xs (for 20), and VI
(for 5 plus 1, or 6); so, 26 is written as XXVI. Thus, we arrive at CCCCLXXVI,
which is 476 written in roman numerals! Conversion to an ordinary number is
easy; we just have to add up the values of the letters, going from left to right.
The Romans did not have a place-value system, where the value of a numeral
would depend on its position within the number. Since the numerals had
definitive values that were simply added up, larger numbers generally needed
more symbols. To shorten the notation, subtractive rules were introduced:
I before V or X indicates one fewer; for example, IV (one less than five: 4)
or IX (one less than ten: 9)
X before L or C indicates ten fewer; for example, XL (ten less than fifty:
40) or XC (ten less than one hundred: 90)
C before D or M indicates one hundred fewer; for example, CD (one

hundred less than five hundred: 400) or CM (one hundred less than one
thousand: 900)
Thus, the year 476 can also be written as CDLXXVI, which is unambiguous
since “CD” must be subtractive notation, since the order of the letters is lower to
higher when read from left to right. Although subtractive notation is the usual
method of writing Roman numbers today, the ancient Romans seem to have
preferred additive forms such as IIII (four) or VIIII (nine), especially in written
documents. Subtractive notation was employed only when there wasn't enough
space or when the numerals had to be engraved in stone. In fact, subtractive
notation became popular in the Middle Ages, several hundred years after the fall
of the Roman Empire. Already in the Roman era both notations lived in peaceful
coexistence, and, sometimes, additive and subtractive forms have been used in
the very same document. This inconsistency has survived to this day, on clock
faces. Many clock faces using Roman numerals show IIII for four o'clock, but
IX for nine o'clock (subtractive notation), as shown in figure 1.6.
Figure 1.6.
Adding roman numbers is particularly simple if the numbers are written in
additive form. For example, if we want to add 37 and 24—that is, XXXVII and
XXIIII—we just to have to put all numerals together, group them, and convert to
larger-value numerals if possible. Thus, the sum would be XXXXXVIIIIII,
which, upon combining five Xs to an L, five Is to a V, and two Vs to an X, yields
LXI, which is 61. Subtraction is also not difficult; we only have to cross out
common numerals. However, we may need to convert larger-value numerals to

smaller-value numerals in order to cross out all numerals of the subtracted
number. For example, to subtract 24 from 61—that is, LXI minus XXIIII—we
would convert LXI to XXXXXVIIIIII and cross out the numerals forming the
subtracted number (XXIIII), leaving us with XXXVII, which is indeed 37 (we
basically apply the addition algorithm backward). The ancient Romans never
developed a concept of zero or negative numbers, which might have something
to do with this crossing-out procedure for subtraction. It is hard to make sense of
crossing out something that is not there.
For very large numbers, the notation really got bulky. During the second
century CE, the city of Rome already had more than one million inhabitants,
making an additive number system consisting of only seven letters not a very
convenient choice for a population census (one million would correspond to a
sequence of thousand Ms).15 Therefore, the Romans developed several special
notations to express very large numbers. We will just mention one of them, the
apostrophus. The apostrophus notation is a system to represent multiplication by
ten, starting with the numbers 500 and 1000. Roman numerals originally had
their own symbols that were probably derived from tally marks. Gradually, these
symbols were replaced by letters of the Roman alphabet that looked similar to
them. The apostrophus notation evolved from the old symbol for 1000, which
was written as ↀ (derived from the Greek Φ) or CIƆ. Adding a C on the left
and the apostrophus, Ɔ, on the right, we obtain CCIƆƆ, which represents 10
times 1000, or 10,000. Adding another “pair of parentheses,” we get CCCIƆƆƆ,
which is 10 times 10,000 or, 100,000, and so on. Splitting the symbol CIƆ into
halves gives CI and IƆ, which turned into D for 500. Analogously, the symbols
IƆƆ and IƆƆƆ would represent “halves,” that is 5,000 and 50,000, respectively.
In not strictly mathematical contexts, the symbol CIƆ could also represent,
symbolically, some very large number, too large to be counted. It is conjectured
that the English mathematician John Wallis (1616–1703) introduced the infinity
symbol, ∞, which he had derived from the roman symbol CIƆ.16
As we said earlier, roman numerals are still everywhere around us; in almost
every larger city, you will find them on building faces, cornerstones, or
gravestones, especially in the older towns in Europe. Being able to “read” them
can be both entertaining and useful. The fact that the roman numeral system
doesn't use place values can also be an advantage. For young children, it is much
easier to understand an additive numeral system than a place-value system. They
will learn roman numerals very quickly and probably enjoy writing their age or
their birthday in this style. Moreover, looking out for roman numbers on a
museum tour or on a walk in the city and deciphering them will be fun and

informative at the same time. Now that we have seen the development of
representing numbers, we take that one step further to another counting aspect of
our society, namely, the calendar.
MATHEMATICS ON THE CALENDAR
All too often, we take for granted how we got to the calendar that we use today,
without any further thought about its accuracy, and how it became the standard
of the world. It is therefore appropriate that we now trace the development of the
present-day Gregorian calendar, and how it has changed over the years. Of
course, we will consider the relationship of the calendar to astronomy, as time
even in antiquity was measured by observing the motions of bodies that move in
unchanging cycles. The only motions of this nature are those of the celestial
bodies. Hence, we owe to astronomy the establishment of a secure basis for the
