these dates will always land on the very same day of the week, every year.
Closer inspection will reveal that these dates are all exactly nine weeks apart.
Such little-known facts always draw an interest that otherwise would be
untapped. Counting on a calendar presents numerous surprises.
Suppose you find an old, unused calendar, and you would like to know when
the calendar can be used again so that each date is on the correct day of the week
for that particular year. For the twentieth and twenty-first century, the following
procedure would work. To make matters simple, let's designate a particular year
with the letter Y.
If Y is a leap year, then the calendar can be reused in the year Y + 28.
If Y is the year following a leap year, then the calendar can be reused in the
years Y + 6, Y + 17, and Y + 28.
If Y is the second year after a leap year, then the calendar can be reused in
the years Y + 11, Y + 17, and Y + 28.
If Y is the third year after a leap year, then the calendar can be reused in the
years Y + 11, Y + 22, and Y + 28.
We will the leave the justification of most of these claims to you, but we will
explain why any calendar can be reused after 28 years, if Y and Y + 28 belong to

the twentieth or twenty-first century. Note that 2000 was not a leap year; hence,
any consecutive 28 years between 1901 and 2099 contain 7 leap years and 21
common years. Since both numbers are multiples of 7, a timespan of exactly 28
years (between 1901 and 2099) will always correspond to an integer number of
weeks. Therefore, all dates of the year will again fall on the same weekday after
28 years. Maybe now you won't take the calendar for granted as much as most
people do in the course of normal daily use. As you can see, once again,
mathematics can explain many things that we would hardly expect.
The second arrangement (see fig. 1.9) consists of three concentric rings
intersected by seven radii. The procedure is:
1. Locate the date and the month on the outer ring; if they are two points, draw
a line between them; if they coincide, draw a tangent.
2. Locate the century on the intermediate ring. Through this point draw a line
parallel to the line drawn, until it intersects the intermediate ring at another
point. The point found will be a ring-radius intersection.
3. From the point just found, follow the radius to the inner ring, then locate the
year. (If the month is January or February, use the preceding year.) Draw a
line between these two points on the inner ring. (If they coincide on
Saturday, then Saturday is the weekday sought.)
4. Now find the point where the Saturday radius cuts the inner ring, and
through this Saturday point draw a line parallel to the line just drawn. The
line will meet the inner ring at some radius-ring intersection. The weekday
on this latter radius is the weekday of the date with which we began.
Figure 1.9.

As previously mentioned, many mathematicians spent a time analyzing the
problem of a perpetual calendar and devoted considerable attention to
calculating the date of Easter Sunday. All church holidays fall on a specific date.
The ecclesiastical rule regarding Easter is, however, rather complicated. Easter
must fall on the Sunday after the first full moon that occurs after the vernal
equinox. Easter Sunday, therefore, is a movable feast that may fall as early as
March 22 or as late as April 25. The following procedure to find Easter Sunday
in any year from 1900 to 1999 is based on a method developed by the famous
German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855).
1. Find the remainder when the year is divided by 4. Call this remainder a.
2. Find the remainder when the year is divided by 7. Call this remainder b.
3. Find the remainder when the year is divided by 19. Multiply this remainder
by 19, add 24, and again find the remainder when the total is divided by 30.
Call this remainder c.
4. Then add 2a + 4b + 6c + 3. Divide this total by 7 and call the remainder d.
The sum of c and d will give the number of days after March 22 on which
Easter Sunday will fall. As an example, let's try to determine what the date of
Easter Sunday in 1921 was.
1. 
 remainder of 1
2. 
 remainder of 0
3. 
 remainder of 
 remainder of 2
4. 
 remainder of 3
5. 2 + 3 = 5 days after March 22 is March 27.
(Note: The method above gives the date accurately except for the years 1954 and
1981. These years it gives a date exactly 1 week late, the correct Easters being
April 18 and 19, respectively.)
We hope that this discussion gives you some insight into the complications of
our calendar. For instance, we now understand why George Washington was
born February 11, 1732, but we celebrate it on February 22. These curiosities
await all who have a better understanding of the mathematical nature of our
calendar, and now you perhaps won't take the calendar for granted!
Now with an insight into how numbers were developed over the past centuries
and how we use them today, we are ready to embark on a journey of exploring

the use of mathematics in our everyday life, where numbers still play an
essential role.

Almost every day we find ourselves in situations in which we apply, consciously
or unconsciously, mathematical knowledge. Basic abilities in arithmetic are
among those mathematical competencies we use most frequently. We may
estimate the time we need to get from one place to another, combining different
means of transportation, or calculating the total cost of the products in our
shopping cart before we go to the register. Of course, one could argue that
mastering arithmetic is nowadays superfluous and old-fashioned, since the
cellphone practically everybody carries around is a smartphone, which can be
used as a calculator. However, simple calculations can often be done much faster
without the assistance of a calculator. It also keeps the brain fit, and using our
own built-in “computer” is definitely more enjoyable than commanding an
electronic device. But, most important, arithmetic offers an accessible
playground for everyone to learn and develop mathematical thinking and
problem-solving strategies, which can, in fact, be very helpful for making
