algorithms. Yet, with practice, some of these methods for two-digit numbers will
become simpler to do mentally than writing them on paper and following the
conventional steps.
ARITHMETIC WITH LOGICAL THINKING
In today's world, most people seem to neglect arithmetic shortcuts. With the
ever-present electronic calculator, many people stop thinking arithmetically, and
quantitatively. Yet there are times when we truly have to think, and neither the
calculator nor any arithmetic shortcuts will help us find the required answer. We
will begin with a little bit of logic that shows us the kind of thinking that we
need to do in today's world.
There are times when simple arithmetic is not enough to answer a question.
These are times when logical reasoning must be used to buttress the arithmetic.
Let's consider one such example.
A woman passes her neighbor's house with her three sons, and her neighbor
asks her how old her three sons are. She responds that, coincidentally, the
product of their ages is 36, and the sum of their ages is the same number as his
address. He looks puzzled as he stares at the house number, which is 13, and
then he becomes even more puzzled when the woman tells him that she almost
forgot one essential piece of information: her oldest son's name is Max. This
really baffles him. How can this man determine the ages of the woman's sons?
(We are only dealing with integer ages.)

To determine the ages of the three sons, the man considers which three
numbers have a product of 36 and a sum of 13. They are (1, 6, 6) and (2, 2, 9).
So, when the woman tells the man that she left out an essential piece of
information, it must have been to differentiate between the two sums of 13.
When she mentioned that her oldest son is named Max, she was indicating that
there is only one older son, thus eliminating the possibility of twins (or perhaps
children of the same age having been born in the same year) of age 6. Hence, the
ages of the three sons are 2, 2, and 9. Here arithmetic calculation alone did not
help us answer the question; we needed to use some logical thinking. Let us now
consider some clever methods for mental calculation.
USING THE FIBONACCI NUMBERS TO CONVERT KILOMETERS TO
AND FROM MILES
When we say that mathematics is always available to help in your everyday life,
we can demonstrate it very nicely by showing you a clever way to convert miles
to and from kilometers. Most of the world uses kilometers to measure distance,
while the United States still holds on to the mile to measure distance. This
requires a conversion of units when one travels in a country in which the
measure of distance is not the one to which we are accustomed. Such
conversions can be done with specially designed calculators or by some “trick”
method. That is where the famous Fibonacci numbers come in. Just to refresh
your memory, the first few Fibonacci numbers are:
1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144,…
Before we discuss the conversion process between these two units of measure,
let's look at their origin. The mile derives its name from the Latin word for
1,000, mille, as it represented the distance that a Roman legion could march in
1,000 paces (which is 2,000 steps). One of these paces was about 5 feet, so the
Roman mile was about 5,000 feet. The Romans marked off these miles with
stones along the many roads they built in Europe—hence the name,
“milestones”! The name statute mile (our usual measure of distance in the
United States today) goes back to Queen Elizabeth I of England (1533–1603)
who redefined the mile from 5,000 feet to 8 furlongs (5,280 feet) by statute in
1593. A furlong is a measure of distance within Imperial units and US customary
units. Although its definition has varied historically, in modern terms it equals
660 feet, and is therefore equal to 201.168 meters. There are eight furlongs in a

mile. The name “furlong” derives from the Old English words furh (“furrow”)
and lang (“long”). It originally referred to the length of the furrow in one acre of
a ploughed open field (a medieval communal field that was divided into strips).
The term is used today for distances horses run at a race track.
The metric system dates back to 1790, when the French National Assembly
(during the French Revolution) requested that the French Academy of Sciences
establish a standard of measure based on the decimal system, which they did.
The unit of length they called a “meter” is derived from the Greek word metron,
which means “measure.” Its length was determined to be one ten-millionth (1 ·
10–7) of the distance from the North Pole to the equator along a meridian going
near Dunkirk, France, and Barcelona, Spain. Clearly, the metric system is better
suited for scientific use than is the American system of measure. By an Act of
Congress in 1866, it became “lawful throughout the United States of America to
employ the weights and measures of the metric system in all contracts, dealings,
or court proceedings.”2 Although it has not been used very often, there is
curiously no such law establishing the use of our mile system.
To convert miles to and from kilometers, we need to see how one mile relates
to the kilometer. The statute mile is exactly 1609.344 meters long. Translated
into kilometers, this is 1.609344 kilometers. One the other hand, one kilometer is
0.621371192 miles long. The nature of these two numbers (reciprocals that differ
by almost 1) might remind us of the golden ratio, which is approximately 1.618,
and its reciprocal, which is approximately 0.618. Remember, it is the only
number whose reciprocal differs from it by exactly 1. This would tell us that the
Fibonacci numbers, the ratio of whose consecutive members approaches the
golden ratio, might come into play here.
Let's see what length 5 miles would be in kilometers: 5 times 1.609344 =
8.04672 ≈ 8.
We could also check to see what the equivalent of 8 kilometers would be in
miles: 8 times 0.621371192 = 4.970969536 ≈ 5. This allows us to conclude that
approximately 5 miles is equal to 8 kilometers. Here we have two of our
Fibonacci numbers.
As mentioned above, the ratio of a Fibonacci number to the one before it is
approximately ϕ, which is the symbol used to note the golden ratio. Therefore,
since the relationship between miles and kilometers is very close to the golden
ratio, they appear to be almost in the relationship of consecutive Fibonacci
numbers. Using this relationship, we would be able to approximately convert 13
kilometers to miles by replacing 13 with the previous Fibonacci number, 8. This
would reveal to us that 13 kilometers is equivalent to about 8 miles. Similarly, 5

kilometers is about 3 miles, and 2 kilometers is roughly 1 mile. The higher
Fibonacci numbers will give us a more accurate estimate, since the ratio of these
larger consecutive Fibonacci numbers gets closer to ϕ.
Now suppose you want to convert 20 kilometers to miles. We have selected 20
