because it is not a Fibonacci number. We can express 20 as a sum of Fibonacci
numbers and convert each number separately and then add them. Thus, 20
kilometers = 13 kilometers + 5 kilometers + 2 kilometers. By replacing each of
these Fibonacci numbers with the one lower, we have 13 replaced by 8, 5
replaced by 3, and 2 replaced by 1. This, therefore, reveals that 20 kilometers is
approximately equal to 8 + 3 + 1 = 12 miles. (Of course, if we would like to
have a faster and perhaps less accurate estimate, we notice that 20 is close to the
Fibonacci number 21. Using that number gives us 13 miles, a reasonable
estimate done more quickly.)
Representing integers as sums of Fibonacci numbers is not a trivial matter. We
can see that every natural number can be expressed as the sum of other
Fibonacci numbers without repeating any one of them in the sum. Let's take the
first few Fibonacci numbers to demonstrate this property as shown in table 2.9:
n
The Sum of Fibonacci Numbers Equal to n
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
1 + 3
5
5
6
1 + 5
7
2 + 5
8
8
9
1 + 8
10
2 + 8
11
3 + 8
12
1 + 3 + 8
13
13
14
1 + 13
15
2 + 13
16
3 + 13
Table 2.9.
You should begin to see patterns and also note that we used the fewest number
of Fibonacci numbers in each sum in the table above. For example, we could

also have represented 13 as the sum of 2 + 3 + 8, or as 5 + 8. Try to express
larger natural numbers as the sum of Fibonacci numbers. Each time, ask yourself
if you have used the fewest numbers in your sum.
To use this process to achieve the reverse, that is, to convert miles to
kilometers, we write the number of miles as a sum of Fibonacci numbers and
then replace each by the next larger Fibonacci number. Converting 20 miles to
kilometers, therefore, gives us a sum as 20 miles = 13 miles + 5 miles + 2 miles.
Now, replacing each of the Fibonacci numbers with their next larger in the
sequence, we arrive at 20 miles = 21 kilometers + 8 kilometers + 3 kilometers =
32 kilometers.
To use this procedure, we are not restricted to use the Fibonacci representation
of a number that uses the fewest Fibonacci numbers. You can use any
combination of Fibonacci numbers whose sum is the number you are converting.
For instance, 40 kilometers is 2 · 20, and we have just seen that 20 kilometers is
12 miles. Therefore, 40 kilometers is 2 · 12 = 24 miles (approximately). It
should be noted that the larger the Fibonacci numbers being used, the more
accurate the estimated conversion will be.
Consequently, we have another example of how some more sophisticated
mathematics can be helpful in resolving a common, everyday problem.
THINKING “OUTSIDE THE BOX”
While grappling with a problem, very often we are asked by friends and
colleagues to “think outside the box.” Essentially, what is being suggested is to
avoid trying to solve a problem in the traditional and expected fashion, and
instead to look at the problem from a different point of view. Practically by
definition, this could be considered a counterintuitive way of thinking. This can
even be true when a rather-simple problem is posed and the straightforward
solution becomes a bit complicated. You could say that many people look at a
problem in a psychologically traditional manner: the way it is presented and
played out. To illustrate this point, we offer a problem here to convince you of an
alternate method of thinking. Try the problem yourself (don't look below at the
solution), and see whether you fall into the “majority-solvers” group. The
solution offered later will probably enchant you, as well as provide future
guidance to you.
The problem: A single-elimination (one loss and the team is eliminated)
basketball tournament has 25 teams competing. How many games must

be played until there is a single tournament champion?
Typically, the common way to approach this problem is to simulate the
tournament, by selecting 24 teams to play in the first round (with one team
drawing a bye). This will eliminate 12 teams (12 games have now been played).
Similarly, of the remaining 13 teams, 6 play against another 6, leaving 7 teams in
the tournament (18 games have been played now). In the next round, of the 7
remaining teams, 3 can be eliminated (21 games have so far been played). The
four remaining teams play and eliminate 2 teams, leaving 2 teams for the
championship game (23 games have now been played). This championship game
is the 24th game.
A much simpler way to solve this problem, one that most people do not
naturally come up with as a first attempt, is to focus only on the losers and not
on the winners (as we have done above). We then ask the key question: “How
