many losers must there be in the tournament with 25 teams in order for there to
be one winner?” The answer is simple: 24 losers. How many games must be
played to get 24 losers? Naturally, 24. So there you have the answer, very simply
done. Now most people will ask themselves, “Why didn't I think of that?” The
answer is it was contrary to the type of training and experience we have had.
Becoming aware of the strategy of looking at the problem from a different point
of view may sometimes reap nice benefits, as was the case here.
Another way of looking at a solution to this problem—albeit quite similar to
the previous solution—is to create an artificial situation where of the 25 teams,
we will make 24 of these teams high-school-level players, and the 25th team a
professional basketball team, such as the New York Knicks, which we will
assume is superior to all of the other teams and will easily defeat each one. In
this artificially construed situation, we would have each of the 24 high-school
teams playing the Knicks, and, as expected, they would lose the game. Hence,
after 24 games, a champion (in this case, the New York Knicks) is achieved.
In everyday life, we are often faced with simple issues that can be addressed
by considering taking a look at the situation from an alternative point of view,
just as we did in the above discussions. Suppose, for instance, you are asked to
determine the number of people in attendance at a meeting of an association.
Counting the members present would be unwieldy, since there may be many
empty seats spread throughout the auditorium. Absentees all called in prior to
the meeting to be excused. Therefore, you can solve the problem of determining
the number present by subtracting the number of absentees from the total
membership of the association. This exemplifies approaching the problem from
a point of view different from simply counting or systematically “estimating” the

attendance. If there are a small number of empty seats, counting the empty seats
would be another way of determining the attendance (assuming you know what
the total number of seats in the room is).
In any competitive sports event, the immediate tendency is to plan to use your
strengths or strategies directly. An alternative point of view would be to assess
and evaluate your competitor's strengths and weaknesses, and then generate your
strategy from that assessment. Rather than viewing the impending contest and
developing your game plan from your own vantage point, you could just as
easily adopt a different point of view and assess it by a consideration of the
competition.
Of course, this strategy has uses beyond the sports arena. It is interesting to
note that in any form of negotiations, rather than only considering your own
point of view, it is important to anticipate what position your “opponent” will
take. Looking at the situation from this other point of view might help you find
an appropriate direction for your own stance at these negotiations.
Another way of looking at this problem-solving strategy is to consider a
detective investigating a case. She can sometimes select the guilty party from
among several suspects not necessarily by proving that this one person
committed the crime, but rather by adopting a different point of view and
establishing that all of the other suspects had valid alibis, for instance. It is a
process of elimination. Naturally, more substantial arguments would be
necessary for a conviction, but at least this process would establish a direction
for the investigation.
It is hoped that this logical demonstration will motivate you to consider
alternative methods of solution even when faced with what appears to be a rather
simple problem, and thereby establish a much more elegant method of solution.
SOLVING PROBLEMS BY CONSIDERING EXTREMES
Sometimes a clever solution to a simple mathematics problem reinforces a clever
thinking procedure. One such strategy is sometimes used subconsciously by
many people. We are referring to making a decision based on the process of
using extremes. We often use extremes camouflaged in the phrase “the worst-
case scenario.” This approach might be considered as we decide which way to
pursue an issue. Such a use of an extreme generally brings us to a good decision.
For instance, one can observe that the windshield of a car appears to get
wetter the faster a car is moving in a rainstorm. This could lead some people to
conclude that the car would not get as wet if it were to move slower. This leads

to the natural next question that can be asked, namely, is it better to walk slowly
or to run in a rainstorm so that you can minimize how much rain soaks your
clothing? Setting aside the amount of wetness that the front of your body might
get from the storm, let us consider two extreme cases for the top of the head:
first, going infinitely fast, and, second, going so slowly as to practically be
stationary. In the first case, there will be a certain amount of wetness on the top
of the head. But, if we proceed at a speed of practically 0 mph, we would get
drenched! Therefore, we conclude that the faster you move, the dryer you stay.
The previous illustration of this rather-useful problem-solving technique,
using extreme cases, demonstrates how we use this strategy to clearly sort out an
otherwise-cumbersome problem situation. We also use this same strategy of
considering extremes in more everyday situations. A person who plans to buy an
item where bargaining plays a part, such as in the process of buying a house or
purchasing an item at a garage sale, must determine a strategy to make the seller
an offer. He must decide what the lowest (extreme) price ought to be and what
the highest (extreme) price might be, and then orient himself from there. In
general, we often consider the extreme values of anything we plan to purchase
and then make our decision about which price to settle on based on the extreme
situations.
This is also relevant when it comes to scheduling. When you are budgeting
time, you must consider extreme cases to be sure that time allocations are
adequate. For example, allowing the maximum amount of time for each of a
series of tasks would then enable an assurance of when the series of tasks would
certainly be completed.
Extreme cases are also utilized when we seek to test a product, say, stereo
speakers. We would want to test them at an extremely low volume and at an
extremely high volume. We would then take for granted (with a modicum of
justification), that speakers that pass the extreme-conditions test would also
function properly between these extreme situations.
In mathematics, using extremes can be particularly useful. We often hear a
problem that dramatically makes that point. A word about the problem before we
present it. This is a problem that is very easy to understand. However, the beauty
of the problem is the elegant solution that involves the use of considering an
extreme. After you read the problem and consider a method of solution, allow
yourself to perhaps struggle a bit before giving up (if you need to), and then
consider the elegant solution provided here that is based on using an extreme
situation. Here is the problem:
