The problem: We have two one-gallon bottles. One bottle contains a

quart of red wine and the other bottle contains a quart of white wine.
We take a tablespoonful of red wine and pour it into the white wine.
Then we take a tablespoon of this new mixture (white wine and red
wine) and pour it into the bottle of red wine. Is there more red wine in
the white-wine bottle, or more white wine in the red-wine bottle?
To solve the problem, we can figure this out in any of the usual ways—often
referred to in the high-school context as “mixture problems”—or we can use
some clever logical reasoning and look at the problem's solution as follows:
With the first “transport” of wine, there is only red wine on the tablespoon. On
the second “transport” of wine, there is as much white wine on the spoon as
there remains red wine in the “white-wine bottle.” This may require some
abstract thinking, but you should “get it” soon.
The simplest solution to understand, and the one that demonstrates a very
powerful strategy, is that of using extremes. Let us now employ this strategy for
the above problem. To do this, we will consider the tablespoonful quantity to be
a bit larger. Clearly the outcome of this problem is independent of the quantity
transported. Therefore, let us use an extremely large quantity. We will let this
quantity actually be the entire one quart—the extreme amount. Following the
instructions given in the problem statement, we will take this entire amount (one
quart of red wine), and pour it into the white-wine bottle. This mixture is now 50
percent white wine and 50 percent red wine. We then pour one quart of this
mixture back into the red-wine bottle. The mixture is now the same in both
bottles. Therefore, we can conclude that there is as much white wine in the red-
wine bottle as there is red wine in the white-wine bottle, and the problem is
solved!
We can consider another form of an extreme case, where the spoon doing the
wine transporting has a zero quantity. In this case, the conclusion follows
immediately: There is as much red wine in the white-wine bottle (none) as there
is white wine in the red-wine bottle (none). Once again, by using extremes we
very easily solved the problem in a rather-elegant fashion.
Another problem that can be rather easily solved by using an extreme
condition is the following:
The problem: A car is driving along a highway at a constant speed of 55
miles per hour. The driver notices a second car, exactly ½ mile behind
him. The second car passes the first, exactly 1 minute later. How fast
was the second car traveling, assuming its speed is constant?

Although this problem could be easily solved by using the traditional
procedures taught in elementary algebra classes, it can be much more easily
disposed of by considering an extreme situation. Assume that the first car is
going extremely slowly, that is, at 0 mph. Under these conditions, the second car
travels ½ mile in one minute to catch the first car, which is to say that the second
car would have to be traveling at a speed of 30 mph. Therefore, when the first
car is moving at 0 mph, we find that the second car is traveling 30 mph faster
than the first car. If, on the other hand, the first car is traveling at 55 mph (as was
stated in the original problem), then the second car must be traveling at 30 + 55
= 85 mph (within the legal limit, we hope!).
We offer these problems merely as a demonstration of the power of thinking
from the point of view of extremes, something that is used frequently in solving
mathematical problems, as well as in the making of proper decisions in our
everyday life.
THE WORKING-BACKWARD STRATEGY IN PROBLEM SOLVING
Often, without being directly aware that we are using a working-backward
strategy, we find it to be a rather-useful approach. For example, the best
approach to determine the most efficient route from one city to another depends
on whether the starting point or the destination (endpoint) has numerous access
roads. When there are fewer roads leading from the starting point, the forward
method is usually superior. However, when there are many roads leading from
the starting point and only one or two from the destination, an efficient way to
plan the trip is to locate this final destination on a map, determine which roads
lead most directly back toward the starting position, and then determine to which
larger road that “last” access road leads. Progressively, by continuing in this way
(i.e., by working backward), you land on a familiar road that is easily reachable
from the starting point. At this step, you will have mapped out the trip in a very
systematic way.
Let's consider a different example: A person who has an appointment in a
distant city must determine the flight she will take to arrive comfortably on time
for her meeting, yet not too far in advance. She begins by examining the airline
schedule, starting with the arrival time closest to her appointment. Will she
arrive in time? Is she “cutting it too close”? If so, she examines the next-earlier
arrival time. Is this time all right? What if there is a weather delay? When is the
next-earlier flight? Thus, by working backward, the traveler can decide the most
appropriate flight to take to get to her appointment on time.

Let's examine another case of working backward. When a high-school
freshman announces to a guidance counselor his desire to be admitted to a major
Ivy League school and wants to know what courses to take, the counselor will
usually look at what the potential college requires. At that point, the counselor
begins to build the student's program for the next four years by working
backward from the Advanced Placement courses that are usually taken in the
senior year. However, to be prepared to take these courses, the student must first
take some of the more-basic courses as a freshman, sophomore, and junior. For
example, to take the Advanced Placement examination in calculus during senior
year, the student must take the appropriate prerequisites. As we have stated
previously, when there is a single final goal and we are interested in discovering
the path to that endpoint from a starting point, we have a good opportunity to use
the working-backward strategy.
The strategy game of Nim is another excellent example of when it is
appropriate to use the working-backward strategy. In one version of the game,
two players are faced with 32 toothpicks placed in a pile between them. Each
player in turn takes 1, 2, or 3 toothpicks from the pile. The player who takes the
final toothpick is the winner. Players develop a winning strategy by working
backward from 32 (i.e., to win, the player must pick up the 28th toothpick, the
24th toothpick, etc.). Proceeding in this manner from the final goal of 32, we
find that the player who wins picks the 28th, 24th, 20th, 16th, 12th, 8th, and 4th
toothpicks. Thus, a winning strategy is to permit the opponent to go first and
proceed as we have shown.
Although many problems may require some reverse reasoning (even if only to
