a minor extent), there are some problems whose solutions are dramatically
facilitated by working backward. Consider the following problem:
The problem: The sum of two numbers is 12, and the product of the
same two numbers is 4. Find the sum of the reciprocals of the two
numbers.
The common approach is to immediately generate two equations x + y = 12
and xy = 4, where x and y represent the two numbers, and then to solve this pair
of equations simultaneously by substitution. Assuming that the problem solver is
aware of the quadratic formula (which is a staple topic in the high-school
curriculum), the correct result will be a pair of rather unpleasant-looking values
for x and y, namely, x = 6 + 4√2 and y = 6 – 4√2 Then we must find the
reciprocals of these numbers and, finally, their sum. Can this problem be solved
in this manner? Yes, of course! However, this rather-complicated solution

process can be made much simpler by starting from the end of the problem,
namely, with what we wish to find, 
 One might logically ask, “What do we
usually do when we see two fractions that are to be added?” If we compute the
sum in the usual way, we obtain 
 However, since we were told at the outset
that x + y = 12 and xy = 4, this fraction is a value 
 and the problem is
solved! This is a dramatic example of how working backward trivializes a
mathematical problem that done conventionally would be significantly more
difficult.
Another everyday problem that requires working backward could be the
following:
The problem: Charles has an 11-liter can and a 5-liter can. How can he
measure out exactly 7 liters of water?
Figure 2.1.
Typically, a common procedure to resolve this problem is to keep “pouring”
back and forth in an attempt to arrive at the correct answer, a sort of
“unintelligent” guessing and testing. However, the problem can be solved in a
more organized manner by using the working-backward strategy. To employ the
strategy, we realize that we need to end up with 7 liters in the 11-liter can,
leaving a total of 4 empty liters in the can. (See fig. 2.1) But where do 4 empty

liters come from?
To obtain 4 liters, we must leave 1 liter in the 5-liter can. Now, how can we
obtain 1 liter in the 5-liter can? Fill the 11-liter can and pour from it twice into
the 5-liter can (fig. 2.2), discarding the water. This leaves 1 liter in the 11-liter
can. Pour the 1 liter into the 5-liter can.
Figure 2.2.
Then fill the 11-liter can and pour off the 4 liters needed to fill the 5-liter can.
(See fig. 2.3.) This leaves the required 7 liters in the 11-liter can. And the
problem is solved!
Figure 2.3.
Note that problems of this sort do not always have a solution. That is, if you
wish to construct additional problems of this type, you must bear in mind that a
solution exists only when the difference of multiples of the capacities of the two
given cans can be made equal to the desired quantity. In this problem, 2 · 11 – 3 ·

5 = 7.
This concept can lead to a discussion of parity. We know that the sum of two
like parities will always be even (i.e., even + even = even, and odd + odd =
even), whereas the sum of two unlike parities will always be odd, odd + even =
odd. Thus, if two even quantities are given, they can never yield an odd quantity.
For example, given a 10-liter can and a 2-liter can, it is not possible to measure
out an odd quantity of liters, since n · 10 – m · 2 = (5n – m)· 2, which is even for
all pairs of integers n and m. On the other hand, if at least one of the two cans
holds an odd quantity of liters, we can measure out both odd and even quantities
of liters (but not arbitrary ones).
Now that we have explored arithmetic shortcuts and clever methods of
thinking logically, we are ready to apply our skills to everyday-life encounters.

There is hardly a moment in our daily travels through our regular experiences
when, in some form or another, mathematics does not present itself. In this
chapter, we will expose some of these experiences as well as make you aware of
how knowledge of some simple mathematics can facilitate your daily
experiences and help you solve everyday life problems.
SHOPPING WITH MATHEMATICAL SUPPORT
Most supermarkets today provide the unit cost of an item. This is very helpful in
that it allows the consumer to decide whether it makes sense to buy two 12 oz.
jars of mayonnaise costing $1.35 per jar, or one 30 oz. jar of the same brand of
mayonnaise costing $3.49. We have been trained to think that the larger quantity
is generally the better price value. However, there is a neat little trick to
determining which option offers the better price per ounce.
First we need to establish the price per ounce for each of the two different-
sized jars:
For the 12-ounce jars, the price per ounce is: 
For the 30-ounce jar, the price per ounce is: 
To compare the two fractions, 
 in order to see which is larger, we can
implement a neat little algorithm to accomplish this task. We will cross multiply,
writing the products under the fraction whose numerator was used. (See table
3.1)
Fraction to Determine Price Per Ounce

Cross Multiplication
1.35 · 30
3.49 · 12
Product of Cross Multiplication
40.50
41.88
Table 3.1.
The larger product (in this case, 41.88), determines which fraction (in this
case, 
) is larger, and therefore which is the more expensive. As we can see in
this example, counterintuitively, the larger jar was more expensive per ounce
than the two smaller jars. Although this is not typically expected, it does occur,
