and for that reason a wise consumer will make these comparisons.
SUCCESSIVE PERCENTAGES
As mentioned above, we encounter mathematical challenges in our everyday
lives and don't even realize that they can be properly understood with just a little
mathematics know-how. We often visit stores that are running a sale and then on
a special day will add a percentage on top of the one that was previously
advertised. The typical response is to add the two percentages and conclude that
the total savings for the day would be the sum of the two percentages. Upon
close reflection, you will see that this is clearly a wrong calculation. Most folks
defer thinking about percentage problems, as they see them as nothing but a
nemesis. Problems get particularly unpleasant when multiple percentages need to
be processed in the same problem. However, we shall see how such successive
percentages lend themselves very nicely to a delightfully simple arithmetic
algorithm that leads us to lots of useful applications and provides new insight
into successive percentage problems. We think you'll find this not-very-well-
known procedure enchanting.
Let's begin by considering the following problem:
The problem: Wanting to buy a coat, Barbara is faced with a dilemma.
Two competing stores next to each other carry the same brand of coat
with the same list price, but with two different discount offers. Store A
offers a 10 percent discount year-round on all its goods, but, on this
particular day, it is offering an additional 20 percent discount on top of
its already-discounted price. Store B simply offers a discount of 30
percent on that day in order to stay competitive. Are the two end prices
the same? If not, which gives Barbara the better price?
At first glance, you may assume there is no difference in price, since 10 + 20

= 30, which would appear to be yielding the same discount in both cases. Yet,
with a little more thought, you may realize that this is not correct, since in store
A only 10 percent is calculated on the original list price, while the 20 percent
discount is calculated on the lower price (that is, the 10 percent discounted
price); in comparison, at store B, the entire 30 percent is calculated on the
original price. Now, the question to be answered is, What percentage difference
is there between the discount in store A and store B?
To determine the difference in the prices, one procedure might be to assume
the cost of the coat to be $100, and then calculate the 10 percent discount,
yielding a $90 price, and then calculate an additional 20 percent of the $90 price
(or $18), which will bring the price down to $72. In store B, the 30 percent
discount on $100 would bring the price down to $70, giving a discount
difference of $2 between the two stores, which in this case would be a 2 percent
difference. This procedure, although correct and not too difficult, is a bit
cumbersome and does not always allow a full insight into the situation, as you
will soon see.
We shall provide an interesting and quite unusual procedure for a deeper look
at this situation as well as for entertainment.
We will consider a somewhat mechanical method for obtaining a single
percentage discount (or increase) equivalent to two (or more) successive
discounts (or increases). Follow this four-step procedure:
(1) Change each of the percentages involved into decimal form:
0.20 and 0.10
(2) Subtract each of these decimals from 1.00 if you are calculating a
discount or decrease (for an increase, add to 1.00):
0.80 and 0.90
(3) Multiply these decimals:
(0.80)(0.90) = 0.72
(4) Subtract this number from 1.00:
1.00 – 0.72 = 0.28, which, written as a percent, is 28 percent. This
represents the combined discount.
(If the result of step 3 is greater than 1.00, subtract 1.00 from it to obtain
the percent of increase.)
When we convert .28 back to percent form, we obtain 28 percent, which is the
equivalent of successive discounts of 20 percent and 10 percent.
Therefore, we can conclude that the combined percentage of 28 percent differs
from the single discount of 30 percent by 2 percent. As such, in our example

above, Barbara should purchase her coat from Store B.
Following the same procedure as above, you can also combine more than two
successive discounts. Furthermore, successive increases, combined or not
combined with a discount, can also be accommodated in this procedure by
adding the decimal equivalent of the increase to 1.00 (recall, the discount was
subtracted from 1.00), and then continue with the procedure in the same way. If
the end result comes out greater than 1.00, then this will have resulted in an
overall increase rather than the discount as found in the above problem.
A conundrum often facing consumers is that of determining whether a
discount and increase of the same percentage leaves the original price
unchanged. For example, suppose a store just increased all of its prices by 10
percent and then notices that its business has declined substantially, whereupon
they then resort discounting all of these recently increased prices by the same
percentage: 10 percent. Have they then restored the prices to their original level?
Using this technique, we find ourselves multiply 1.1 times 0.90 to get 0.99,
which would indicate that the original price had dropped by 1 percent. For many
people this is a counterintuitive result. (Again, with further reflection, you'll see
that the difference is a result of considering the original price prior to the 10
percent increase and then the new price prior to its 10 percent decrease. Ten
percent of the lower price amounts to less than 10 percent of the higher price. By
taking 10 percent off of the higher price, the store is therefore providing a
steeper discount than it had for the increase.)
As you can see, this procedure not only streamlines a typically cumbersome
situation but also provides some insight into the overall picture. For example,
consider the following question: Is it advantageous to the buyer in the above
problem, Barbara, to receive a 20 percent discount and then a 10 percent
discount, or the reverse, a 10 percent discount and then a 20 percent discount?
The answer to this question is not immediately intuitively obvious. Yet, since the
procedure just presented shows that the calculation is merely multiplication, a
commutative operation, we can immediately conclude that there is no difference
between the two.
So here you have a delightful algorithm for combining successive discounts or
increases or combinations of these to calculate the combined result. Not only is it
useful, but also it gives you some newfound power in dealing with percentages
when a calculator might not be available.
