additional property that simplifies many standard procedures of printing or
copying, thereby increasing their efficiency and eventually resulting in a cost
reduction.
COMPARING AREAS AND PERIMETERS
Having now considered the dimensions of paper, let's take this one step further
in a more general sense. As consumers, we are often required to make decisions
about area and perimeter. This can come up in a number of ways. For example, if
one is planning to construct a swimming pool and wants to maximize the surface
area of the swimming pool, does that mean that the perimeters should be
maximized? Furthermore, when installing drain pipes for the swimming pool, is
one better off having one large drain hole with, say, a 6-inch diameter, or two
drain holes side by side, each with 3-inch diameters? Some say in the latter case
it would be the same. Some people might assume that the longer perimeter of a
rectangle implies a larger area, and there is often the belief that the area of a
rectangle would remain constant if the perimeter remains constant.
An interesting situation was recently experienced when a contractor was
planning the installation of ductwork in a new home and had to turn a right-
angled corner with a duct whose cross-section was a square with a side length of
6 inches. When he told the owner that he was going to maintain the same
perimeter but change the dimensions of the ductwork in order to make the right-
angle turn so that the cross-section would be 3″ · 9″, the owner objected, fearing
that it would restrict the airflow. Here was a situation where the contractor felt
that as long as he kept the perimeter of the ductwork unchanged, the airflow
would also be unchanged. Who was correct in this situation? As you will see

during the following discussion, there may be some enlightening surprises
ahead.
Comparing areas and perimeters is a very tricky thing. A given perimeter can
yield many different areas. And a given area can be encompassed by many
different perimeters. For example, let's consider rectangles of perimeter 20. As
seen in figure 3.3, they may have very different areas despite their similar
perimeters.
Figure 3.3.
With a perimeter of 20, the area of rectangle ABCD is 24.
With a perimeter of 20, the area of rectangle HIJK is 9.
With a perimeter of 20, the area of rectangle PQRS is 25.
It can be shown that the maximum area of a rectangle with a fixed perimeter is
the one with equal length and width, that is, a square. Just the opposite is true for
a rectangle of given area; the minimum perimeter is that where the length and
width are equal, once again a square.
It is interesting to compare areas of similar figures. Next, we will consider
circles. Suppose you have four equal pieces of string. They are shown in figure
3.4.

Figure 3.4.
With the first piece of string, one circle is formed.
The second piece of string is cut into two equal parts, and two congruent
circles are formed.
The third piece of string is cut into three equal pieces, and three congruent
circles are formed.
In a similar way, four congruent circles are formed from the fourth piece of
string.
Note that the sum of the circumferences of each group of congruent circles
is the same.
Table 3.6.
An inspection of table 3.6 indicates that the sum of the circumferences for
each group of circles is the same yet the sum of the areas is quite different. The
more circles we formed with the same total length of string, the smaller the total
area of the circles. This is just what you would not intuitively expect to happen!
That is, when two equal circles were formed, the total area of the two circles
was one-half that of the large circle. Similarly, when four equal circles were
formed, the total area of the four circles was one-fourth of the area of the large
circle.
From this counterintuitive perspective, if we consider a more extreme case,
with, say, 100 smaller equal circles, we would see that the area of each circle
becomes extremely small and the sum of the areas of these 100 circles is one-
hundredth of the area of the larger circle. Try to explain this rather-disconcerting
concept. It ought to give you an interesting perspective on the comparison of
areas and perimeters.
MATHEMATICS IN HOME CONSTRUCTION

Needless to say, there are countless applications of mathematics in the home.
Clearly, we cannot cover all of them, but we will select a few that give you a
sense of mathematics at work. Let's begin with a problem that could come up in
a number of applications. We will use one where a contractor comes into your
home and wants to install some new ductwork. That is, to install a heating or air-
conditioning passage through an aluminum channel (a duct) that has a
rectangular cross-section. The situation described here actually confronted one
of the authors. It demonstrates that the consideration of area can be extremely
critical when involved with some home construction.
A contractor offered to replace some air-conditioning ducts at a friend's home.
Needing to turn the duct around a corner at a right angle in the basement in a
rather tight space, he indicated that he would keep the amount of aluminum the
same, which was used to make a 6″ · 12″ duct, but as he would turn the corner,
he claimed that he would need to make it narrower and use a 3″ · 15″ duct. He
claimed that it should be no problem since the same amount of aluminum was
being used. The author tried to explain to him that this was unacceptable because
the cross-section area of the 3″ · 15″ duct would be considerably less than the 6″
· 12″ duct, which would have an effect of cutting down the airflow. The
contractor didn't understand this point until the author chose to use as an
example an extreme case, where the dimensions would be 0.5″ · 17.5″, which
would clearly restrict the flow of air. After he was presented with this example,
he realized the error of his ways.
What he had come to realize with the above example is that it is the area of
the cross-section of the duct that determines the airflow. In other words, we had
to compare the cross-section of a 6″ · 12″ duct with that of a 3″ · 15″ duct. In
figure 3.5, we see the two cross-sections compared, where the first has an area of
6 · 12 = 72 square inches and the other has an area of 3 · 15 = 45 square inches.
Clearly the latter allows less air to pass through than the former.

