Figure 3.5.
For the given perimeter of this ductwork, 36″, the maximum area would be a
square with a side length of 6″.
This can be extended to another situation, where we have a given amount of
cardboard and we would like to create a box with the greatest possible volume
from the given amount of cardboard. Rather than to experiment with different
dimensions, we can extend the notion of a square providing the largest area from
the given perimeter to see that a cube would generate the largest volume. That is,
a rectangular solid with all square faces.
Another issue to deal with when it comes to home construction is the problem
of emptying a swimming pool or a bathtub, where you have the option of using
two drains of 2″ diameter or one drain of a 4″ diameter. Intuitively, it would
seem that either option would drain equally quickly. However, that is not the
case. Once again, we need to consider the cross-section of each of the two drain
sizes. Using the famous formula for the area of the circle of radius 1, which is
π12, we find the area of the cross-section of each of the two smaller drains is
equal to π, which together gives us a total cross-section area of 2π. On the other
hand, the cross-section area of the larger drain of radius 2 is 4π, which is twice
the drain capability of the two smaller drains. We see that our intuition might
have misled us, but mathematics brings us back on the correct path.
An analogous problem would be that of filling a tub with two hoses. Suppose
one hose can fill it in 2 hours and the other hose can fill the tub in 3 hours. How
long would it take to fill the tub with both hoses working together? Once again,
our intuition may not be very helpful here. There are a number of ways of

approaching this problem. One is to notice that since the first hose alone can fill
the entire tub in two hours, it can fill ½ of the tub in 1 hour; while, in
comparison, the second hose working alone could fill the entire tub in three
hours, so it would fill  of the tub in 1 hour. Working together, they would fill 
of the tub in one hour. Algebraically, we would represent that as follows: 
and then we have 
 hours, or one hour and 12 minutes. Again, this is
something that is not intuitively obvious.
For this next illustration, the reader would be advised to briefly skip ahead to
chapter 5 for the definition of a reflection in a plane so that we can use this
concept to solve another home-construction problem. Suppose you would like to
install an electric outlet along the wall, knowing that to this outlet two lamps will
need to be connected. However, we would like to use the least amount of wire to
connect these 2 lamps to the outlet. How might we locate this ideal point along
the wall? Let's consider the situation shown in figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6.
One way of locating this ideal point for the electrical outlet is to find the
reflection of lamp 1 in the wall, and then join that reflection point with a straight
line to lamp 2. The point at which that line segment intersects the side of the
wall is the point at which the outlet should be placed, since that is the minimum
distance point from lamp 1 to the electrical outlet to lamp 2.
These are just some of the many applications of mathematics beyond those
that we typically consider and that are usually found in the school curriculum.

THE PERFECT MANHOLE COVER
Suppose we now take our view of construction-related thinking outside of the
house. How many times do we walk over manhole covers without thinking for a
moment why they are all in a circular shape? The vast majority of manhole
covers we see on the street are, in fact, circles. Have you ever wondered why
they are all circular? Analyze figure 3.7 to see why circular covers would be
preferable to square-shaped covers. (As you can see, the circular shape cover can
never fall into the hole, as would be the case with a square-shaped cover.)
Figure 3.7.
The question then arises, is there any other shape that can be used to cover a
manhole that will also not be able to fall into the hole? The answer to this
question was provided by the German engineer Franz Reuleaux (1829–1905),
who taught at the Royal Technical University of Berlin, Germany. He developed
a rather odd-looking shape that is now called a Reuleaux triangle, which we
show in figure 3.8.

Figure 3.8.
One might wonder how Franz Reuleaux ever thought of this triangle. It is said
that he was in search of a button that was not round but still could fit through a
button hole equally well from any orientation. His “triangle” solved the problem.
A manhole cover of the shape is shown in figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9.
The Reuleaux triangle is formed by three circular arcs along each side of an
equilateral triangle with centers at the opposite vertices of the equilateral
triangle. It has many unusual properties, and it compares nicely to a circle of
similar breadth. In the case of a circle, the breadth is the diameter, while for the
Reuleaux triangle it is the distance across—from a triangle vertex to the opposite
arc. We refer to the distance between two parallel lines tangent to the curve as
the breadth of the curve. In figure 3.10 we notice how a wrench is simply
ineffectual when trying to turn a circular screw.
Figure 3.10.
The same would hold true for a Reuleaux triangular head (figure 3.11). It, too,
would slip, since it is a curve of constant breadth, just as the circle is.

Figure 3.11.
This becomes particularly significant when fire hydrants are designed so that
only special tools can turn them on. Often, a pentagonal valve screw is used to
open such a hydrant, since a common wrench cannot be used, as would be the
case with a hexagonal or a square valve screw, each of which has a pair of
opposite parallel sides. Similarly, a circular valve screw would not suffice, as a
wrench would not be able to grab it appropriately, as we saw in figure 3.10.
This brings us to the point of using a Reuleaux-triangle-type of valve screw,
which can only be turned with a wrench of exactly the same shape. One such
example of a fire hydrant is shown in figure 3.12.
Figure 3.12.
So here is a practical application of this situation. During the summer months,
kids in a city like to “illegally” turn on the fire hydrants to cool off on very hot
days. Since the valve of the hydrant is often a hexagonal-shaped nut, they simply
get a wrench to open the hydrant. If that nut were the shape of a Reuleaux
triangle, then the wrench would slip along the curve just as it would along a
circle. However, with the Reuleaux triangle nut, unlike a circular-shaped nut, we
