
could have a special wrench with a congruent Reuleaux triangle shape that
would fit about the nut and not slip. This would not be possible with a circular
nut. Thus, the Fire Department would be equipped with a special Reuleaux
wrench to open the hydrant in cases of fire, yet the Reuleaux triangle could
protect against playful water opening, and avoid water being wasted in this
manner.
A curious property of the Reuleaux triangle is that the ratio of its perimeter to
its breadth, which is 
 is the same as that ratio for a circle, 
The comparison of the areas of these two shapes is quite another thing, and it
could be useful when deciding what shape to make a manhole cover. Let's
compare their areas. We can get the area of the Reuleaux triangle in a clever
way, by adding the three circle sectors that overlap in the equilateral triangle and
then deducting the pieces that overlap, so that this region is actually only
counted once and not three times.
The total area of the three overlapping circle sectors, where each is  of the
area of the circle shown in figure 3.13, is equal to 
 From this we need to
subtract twice the area of the equilateral triangle, which is 
 Therefore, the
area of the Reuleaux triangle is equal to
while the area of a circle with diameter of length r is equal to 
Therefore, the area of the Reuleaux triangle is less than the area of the circle,
which we can also see rather clearly in figure 3.13, where the two shapes are
superimposed along with the an equilateral triangle.

Figure 3.13.
This is consistent with our understanding of regular polygons, where the circle
has the largest area for a given diameter. Furthermore, the Austrian
mathematician Wilhelm Blaschke (1885–1962) proved that given any number of
such figures of equal breadth, the Reuleaux triangle will always possess the
smallest area, and the circle will have the greatest area.
Therefore, from a practical standpoint, to design a manhole cover of a given
breadth, and one that would not be able to fall into the hole, the Reuleaux
triangle shape would be the economic choice, as it would require less metal to
construct. Here is an interesting application of some genuine mathematics
applied to a piece of our environment that we seem to take for granted.
By the way, we can also create a Reuleaux pentagon by constructing circular
arcs from each vertex and joining the endpoints of the opposite side, as shown in
figure 3.14. This shape shares the properties of the Reuleaux triangle and the
circle in that it can fit between two fixed parallel lines regardless of its position.
Can this be done with other regular polygons? If so, which ones?

Figure 3.14.
DESIGN YOUR OWN COFFEE-CUP SLEEVE!
When you order a to-go coffee at a coffee shop or a fast-food restaurant, it will
usually be served in a handle-less paper cup together with a tightly fitting
cardboard sleeve, insulating your hand from the hot coffee, as we show in figure
3.15.
Figure 3.15.

The coffee-cup sleeve is a simple, yet ingenious, piece of design. It was
patented in 1995 by Jay Sorensen (1958–), and it truly is a great example of
industrial design. As “form follows function,” it may not appear very impressive
at first sight, but it had a huge effect on the coffee-to-go culture and soon became
ubiquitous in modern coffee shops all around world. It was invented in response
to a problem that almost everyone was concerned with: Hot coffee in a
disposable, handle-less paper cup is not very enjoyable if your fingers get burned
while drinking. Before the invention of the coffee-cup sleeve, using two or more
nested paper cups for a single hot beverage was a common practice. Clearly, this
is far from a reasonable solution, not only from an ecological viewpoint but also
from an economical one. The coffee-cup sleeve represents a simple, cheap, and
effective way to deal with this problem. Because the coffee-cup sleeve has
become an indispensable item of everyday life, the Museum of Modern Art in
New York acquired a standard coffee-cup sleeve for its collection “Humble
Masterpieces.” An additional, often-neglected advantage of the coffee-cup
sleeve is the possibility to reuse it, making it environmentally sustainable.
However, manufactured coffee-cup sleeves are not very stylish. They often carry
logos, brands, or even advertisements, and brown can be considered a rather-
boring color. Why not design your own, reusable coffee-cup sleeve? Apart from
protecting your fingers from the heat, this will also protect the environment,
avoiding another disposable paper-cup sleeve every time you consume a “to-go
coffee.”
To create your personal coffee-cup sleeve, you need flexible cardboard or felt
and a template as a guide to cut the material. The template can be printed or
drawn on paper or cardboard and then cut out. By now, you may have started to
wonder what this has to do with mathematics, but you will soon see. A template
for a coffee-cup sleeve will look similar to the one we show in figure 3.16.
Figure 3.16.

It is basically a segment of a circular ring with an additional small segment
that can be used as a fold to glue the ends together. If felt is used, the fold can be
omitted since the ends would be sewed or pinned. But the important question we
first have to answer is how to determine the proper shape of the template, given
the shape of the coffee cup. This is, in fact, a mathematical problem; more
precisely, it is a problem belonging to elementary geometry. Of course, we could
use brute force and cut open the cup to create a template out of it, but this
wouldn't be very elegant. A paper cup is essentially a frustum of a cone, that is,
the remainder of a cone when the vertex is cut off parallel to the base,
determined by its diameters at the bottom and the top, and its height. In figure
3.17, we show a frustum of a cone with its profile, where the segment AB
represents the top radius, r1, and the segment A′B′ represents the bottom radius,
r2. We have also labeled the vertical height, h = AA′, and the lateral height, s =
BB′, measured flat to the cup wall. To construct the apex of the cone, we extend
the segments AA′ and BB′ to their point of intersection, C, and denote the
segment B′C by t.
Figure 3.17.
Knowing t, we can construct the full lateral surface area of the frustum, which
we also show in figure 3.17. It is a segment of a circular ring with inner radius t
