and outer radius t + s. The outer circular arc, at distance t + s from the center, is
of length 2πr1. The inner circular arc, at distance t from the center, is of length
2πr2. To determine the angle α, we only have to find the fraction of a full circle
that is covered by these circular arcs. The circumference of a circle with radius t
is 2πt, hence the inner circular arc of length 2πr2 is a fraction, 
 of the full circle
and thus α = 360° 
To find t, we observe that the shaded triangle in the center of figure 3.17 is
similar to triangle A′B′C. Therefore, we have 
 implying that 
Substituting t in the formula for α, we get α = 360° 

Assume that the band of the sleeve shall be between s1 and s2, measured from
the bottom of the cup along its lateral height. Then the template for this sleeve
would be a segment of a circular ring with inner radius t + s1 and outer radius t
+ s2 (see fig. 3.17). The distance t and the angle α are all we need to draw the
template.
In summary, to create a template for a tightly fitting coffee-cup sleeve, you
have to measure the diameters on the top and the bottom of the cup and its lateral
height. With this information, you can easily compute the required values of 
 and α = 360° 
 Then you choose the breadth of the band by
specifying s1 and s2. This is all you need to draw the template. We hope you will
enjoy your next coffee to-go in your personally constructed coffee-cup sleeve!
HOW TO OPTIMALLY WRAP A PRESENT
You're back home now, and you're faced with a common domestic concern.
Suppose you want to wrap a present and are wondering how much wrapping
paper you will need. If the shape of the item to be wrapped is that of a
polyhedron (a three-dimensional shape that has flat surfaces and straight edges),
then the minimum amount of paper you will need is represented by the total
surface area of the polyhedron. Now imagine you cut the surface of the
polyhedron along its edges, such that you can unfold it to get a non-overlapping
arrangement of edge-joined polygons in the plane. This is called the “net” of the
polyhedron. In figure 3.18, we show the net of a regular tetrahedron, a
polyhedron composed of four equilateral triangles.
Figure 3.18.
Depending on the choices of which edges are joined and which are separated,
you may obtain different nets for the same polyhedron. For instance, there exist

eleven distinct nets for a cube, which we show in figure 3.19.
Figure 3.19.
This might be helpful if you want to wrap a cube and only have a small and
irregularly shaped piece of wrapping paper left. Although it may seem
impossible to wrap this leftover piece of paper all around the cube, one of the
eleven different nets of the cube could still fit on it. The German artist Albrecht
Dürer (1471–1528) used such nets to show polyhedrons in his book
Underweysung der Messung mit dem Zirckel und Richtscheyt (Instructions for
Measurement with Compass and Ruler, also known as Four Books on
Measurement). Determining the number of different nets that exist for a given
polyhedron is by itself an interesting geometrical problem. It is actually not
known whether every convex polyhedron has at least one (non-overlapping) net.
Although there is no evidence that Dürer recognized this statement as something
that has to be proved, it is now called Dürer's conjecture. In figure 3.20 we show
the number of distinct nets for the five Platonic solids (convex polyhedrons with
congruent faces).
Figures 3.20.

For nonregular polyhedrons (not all faces are congruent), the number of
distinct nets increases. For example, a rectangular cuboid (a solid comprised of
three opposite pairs of congruent rectangular faces) with three different lengths
a, b, c has fifty-four different nets. Therefore, finding the optimal net to make
the best use of a leftover piece of wrapping paper is not an easy task. However,
we will consider the more common situation that we have a roll of wrapping
paper at hand and want to cut off a sheet of paper that is just large enough to
wrap the item. Our goal is to avoid unnecessary waste, but, since we don't want
to spend too much time for wrapping the present, we want to make only one
straight cut to separate a rectangular piece from the roll. We will further assume
that the item has the shape of a rectangular cuboid with sides a ≥ b ≥ c. Of the up
to fifty-four possible nets, we are interested in variants closely resembling a
rectangle, in order to minimize excess paper. Two nets of the same rectangular
cuboid with sides a ≥ b ≥ c are shown in figure 3.21.
Figure 3.21.
If we ignore the width of the paper roll, the minimum size of the wrapping
paper is given by the smallest rectangle that contains a net of this cuboid. Net A
fits inside a rectangle with sides 2b + 2c and a + 2c. (See fig. 3.21.) The area of
this rectangle is therefore 2(b + c)(a + 2c). The area of the smallest rectangle
containing net B is 2(a + c)(b + 2c). (See fig. 3.21.) It is not immediately
obvious which area is smaller (we would have to expand and subtract the two
expressions). However, instead of comparing the areas of the enclosing
rectangles, we may also look at the area of the excess paper (since the areas of
the nets must be equal). As we can see in figure 3.21, the excess area for each of
the nets can be decomposed into four identical squares of size c2 and two
rectangles of height c, but with different lengths. The rectangles alongside net A
are b units long, while those alongside net B are a units long. Since b ≤ a, there
is less waste if we cut out a rectangular piece of paper enclosing net A. The total
excess area of 2c(b + 2c) is actually not completely wasted, since we may need
some overlap to affix the wrapping paper appropriately anyway.

So far we have not included the width of the wrapping paper roll in our
considerations. This will change the picture, since the length of one side of the
rectangular piece of paper is already fixed by the width w of the roll. Both nets
can be placed either parallel (“horizontal”) or perpendicular (“vertical”) to the
longer side of the rolled-up paper. We show all four possible arrangements in
figure 3.22.
Figure 3.22.
As one side of the dashed-line rectangle has always length w, the best choice
is the arrangement for which the other side of the rectangle is the shortest, and
the answer depends on the dimensions of the cuboid in relation to the width of
the roll. If net B can be placed “vertically,” which is only possible for w ≥ 2(a +
c), then this would be the most efficient method (see figure 3.22). If w < 2(a +
