in 1930), and three presidents died on July 4 (John Adams and Thomas Jefferson
in 1826, and James Monroe in 1831). How curious that the only two signers of
the Declaration of Independence who went on to become presidents (Adams and
Jefferson) died on the very same day—the date that the Declaration the
Independence was ratified!
Above all, this astonishing demonstration should serve as an eye-opener about
the inadvisability of relying too much on intuition, and becoming aware of how
mathematics is truly a part of our lives.
SELECTING CLOTHES
There are times when selecting clothes can be seen as a mathematical problem to
be solved. One might also consider this an exercise in logical thinking. Here we
see an example that shows how reasoning with extremes, as we discussed in an
earlier chapter, is a particularly useful strategy to solve some problems. It can
also be seen as a “worst-case scenario” strategy. The best way to appreciate this
kind of thinking is through example. Therefore, we will consider the following
problem.
The problem: In a drawer, there are 8 blue socks, 6 green socks, and 12
black socks. What is the fewest number of socks that Charlie must take
from the drawer in a dark room—where he cannot see the colors—to
be certain that he has selected two socks of the same color?
The problem does not specify which color, so any of the three colors would
satisfy his selection. To solve this problem, you might reason from the
perspective of a “worst-case scenario.” Suppose Charlie is very unlucky and on
his first 3 picks, he selects one blue sock, one green sock, and then one black
sock. He now has one of each color, but no matching pair. Although he might
have picked a matching pair on his first two selections, we need to determine

how many socks he must select to be certain of having a matching pair. As soon
as he now picks the fourth sock, he must match one of his first three picks; and,
therefore, he would have a pair of the same color.
Let's go back to the sock drawer and consider an alternative problem situation
as expressed in the following problem:
The problem: In a drawer, there are 8 blue socks, 6 green socks, and 12
black socks. What is the fewest number of socks that Max must take
from the drawer—without looking—to be certain that he has selected
two black socks?
Although this problem appears to be similar to the previous one, there is one
important difference. In this problem, a specific color has been required: Max
must choose a pair of black socks. Again, let's use deductive reasoning and
construct the “worst-case scenario.” Suppose Max first picks all of the eight blue
socks. Next, he picks all six green socks. Still not one black sock has been
chosen. Max now has selected 14 socks in all, but none of them is black.
However, the next two socks he picks must be black, since there are only black
socks remaining in the drawer. In order to be certain of picking two black socks,
Max must select 8 + 6 + 2 = 16 socks in all.
There are other considerations when selecting clothes to wear, and that
requires what is known in mathematics as the fundamental accounting principle.
Suppose we are traveling and have taken along 5 shirts, 3 pairs of pants, and 2
jackets. The question then is, How many different outfits can we make from the
clothes we have taken along? The reasoning is that for each of the 3 pairs of
pants we can use any one of 5 shirts, which means there are 15 possible
arrangements of these garments. Then for each of the 15 possible arrangements
we can select one of the 2 jackets, providing us with 30 possible outfits. What
the fundamental accounting principle tells us is that we merely have to multiply
the three numbers to get the total number of outfits.
PLAYING CARDS, A COUNTERINTUITIVE PROBABILITY
The topic of probability permeates all of card playing. A knowledge of the
probability of getting a winning hand at any card game will always give an
advantage to the person betting on the game. There are entire books written
about the probability of getting certain poker hands or winning at blackjack;
however, we will take a very simple situation with two decks of cards (each deck

containing 52 cards) to show how a simple question can lead to a very
significant mathematical constant. In addition, the result we show will probably
be counterintuitive.
The problem: If you have two well-shuffled decks stacked facedown
beside each other and begin by turning over one card from each deck
at the same time, what is the probability that at least one pair being
turned over will be identical?
We begin with the two decks of cards, but to make our process simpler, we
will shuffle only one deck of cards, and the other deck will be placed in a
sequential numerical order. The probability that the first card turned over on
each deck will be a match is 
 since there are 52 cards in the shuffled deck and
only one of them will match the first card of the ordered deck. From this we can
conclude that the probability that the two first cards don't match is 
 Moving
along, the probability that each succeeding turned over card does not match its
partner is approximately 
 We say approximately because we are ignoring
the fact that an earlier card in the shuffled deck could have come up for its
partner in the ordered deck. We thus expect the probability that none of the 52
cards turned over in pairs produced a match is the product of these 52 individual
probabilities of approximately 
 which is actually 
This expression reminds us of a very significant expression in mathematics,
which we encountered earlier. The general form would be 
 When this value
of n takes on increasingly larger numbers, we find that it approaches
2.7182818284590452353602874713527…, which is referred to by the famous
Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler (1707–1783) with the letter e, and it is one
of the most important mathematical constants. Another way of generating the
value of e is the following series: 
Let's now consider ex, which will give us 
 Reverting to our original
expression that generated our digression to e, namely, 
 we find that this is
very close to 
 This is approximately 
 a number somewhat greater than 
