of Science in Boston.
Most are familiar with this game, where players alternate turns placing an “X”
or an “O” in an empty cell on a 3 × 3 or 9-cell grid as shown in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1.
The goal is to get three of your own marks in a straight row, with no
intervening spaces or an opponent's mark. Most of us have played this game and
developed a strategy that will lead to either a win or a draw. The majority of
players usually prefer to go first. Since there are nine cells on the board, going
first ensures a chance to place your mark in five cells total, as opposed to the
opponent's four cells. Furthermore, most players going first seem to place their
mark in the center square. This square is involved in a winning position four
times out of eight. Corner squares are involved in a winning position three times
out of eight. Sounds easy enough, doesn't it? And yet, the center cell as a first
move is not the best approach. The player going first should place his or her X or
O in one of the four corner cells. This corner-cell placement is the one that can

lead to developing two possibilities for a win. Once these two possibilities have
been developed, the opponent cannot block both at once, and a win is assured. If
both players are careful and know the strategy, then the very least that can occur
is a tie.
Let's consider a strategy used in playing tic-tac-toe. We will have the player
using the X go first, and he has three options for his first move. He can place the
X in either a corner cell, a middle border cell, or the center cell. This player can
force a draw or can win with any of these three starting moves. However, by
placing the first move in a corner cell, the second player is limited in his move to
avoid losing. The second player, using an O, must respond to the first player's
move defensively.
If the first player chooses to place the X in a corner cell, then the second
player must place the O in the center cell. If the first player chose to place the X
as the initial move in the center cell, then the second player must place his O in a
corner cell. If the first player places his initial move by placing the X in a side
middle cell, then the second player must place the O in either the center cell, a
corner cell next to the O-placed cell, or the side-middle cell opposite the X cell.
Any other move by the second player will result in a win by the X player. After
these two moves, the second player continuously places Os to block the first
player's attempt to get three Xs in a row. Of course, there is always the
possibility that the first player, X, might make a careless move that allows the
second player, O, to win rather than just to force a draw.
For the second player, placing O, to guarantee a draw, he would need to
adhere to the following: If the first player does not place the X in the center cell,
then the second player should occupy the center cell with the O, followed by a
side middle cell. If the first player places an X in the corner square, and the
second player places an O in the opposite corner, that will allow the first player
to win if he places the second X in one of the unoccupied corners. If the first
player places an X in the corner cell, then the only way the second player can
force a tie is to place an O in the center cell and then, as his next move, to place
an O in a side-middle cell. By this time, you should be able to notice the various
strategies that clever players would use to always end up in a tie. It is when one
player makes a careless move the other player will be able to win.
When we analyze the game from a mathematical point of view, there are
exactly 138 possible final positions for the game's end. Assuming that the X
makes the first move, then 91 positions would have the X as winner; 44
positions would have the O as winner; and 3 positions would have the game end
in a draw.
Let's make a simple change in the game, thus creating another game and

requiring another strategy. In this new version of the game, three in a row loses
the game. Does the strategy change? Do you still want to go first? Do you still
want to place your X or O in the corner square? A new problem has been
presented, and a different strategy must be developed. Play the game with this
new goal and see what transpires.
Consider this simulation of the game. Suppose the first player places an X in
the center cell. If the second player places an O in a corner cell, then the first
player is forced to have two of his marks in a row in more than one position.
How can this be avoided? Was this a good first move? Notice that once a player
occupies the center cell, his next move guarantees two in a row, which turns out
to be a bad strategy indeed.
Once you have mastered the original game of tic-tac-toe and can either win or
tie almost every time, several thoughts should come to mind about this particular
version of the game (in which having three marks in a row causes you to lose).
First of all, since there are nine empty cells, you might think it is preferable to go
second, since this forces your opponent to place five of his marks on the grid,
while you need to place only four of your marks. However, this doesn't always
work. Instead, if you go first, place your mark in one of the side-middle cells of
the board. These four cells are those least likely to result in three in a row. If you
go second, do the same thing. You will quickly see how this strategy can be
effective.
Even a strategy game as simple as the original tic-tac-toe affords many
opportunities to utilize mathematical skills. Explaining the rationale for making
a particular move helps develop your reasoning skills. Communicating these
ideas verbally creates an informal dialogue that leads to increasing higher-order
thinking and problem-solving skills. Every move requires an informal
calculation of the probability of winning or losing the game. Even an opponent's
move raises the question of the probability of winning the game.
THE MONTY HALL PROBLEM
It is rare that a mathematics problem would appear on the front page of the New
York Times, as it did on July 21, 1991. During the year prior to its appearance, it
was quite a controversy, generated by Marilyn vos Savant in a question-and-
answer column in Parade magazine. Mathematicians were arguing about the
proper solution to a problem posed as a result of a popular television show, Let's
Make a Deal. This program was a long-running television game show that
featured a problematic situation for a randomly selected audience member to

come on stage, be presented with three doors, and be asked to select one.
Hopefully the contestant would select the door with the car and not one of the
other two doors, each of which had a donkey behind it. There was only one
wrinkle in this: After the contestant made her selection, the host, Monty Hall,
would expose one of the two donkeys behind one of the unselected doors
(leaving two doors still unopened). Then the audience participant would be
asked if she wanted to stay with her original selection (not yet revealed) or
