switch to the other unopened door. At this point, to heighten the suspense, the
rest of the audience would shout out “stay” or “switch” with seemingly equal
frequency. The question is, What should she do? Does it make a difference? If
so, which is the better strategy to use here (i.e., which provides the greater
probability of winning)?
This problem has caused many an argument in academic circles, and it was
also a topic of discussion in the New York Times and other popular publications
as well. John Tierney wrote in the New York Times on Sunday, July 21, 1991,
that “perhaps it was only an illusion, but for a moment here it seemed that an end
might be in sight to the debate raging among mathematicians, readers of Parade
magazine and fans of the television game show Let's Make a Deal. They began
arguing last September after Marilyn vos Savant published a puzzle in Parade.
As readers of her ‘Ask Marilyn’ column are reminded each week, Ms. vos
Savant is listed in the Guinness Book of World Records Hall of Fame for
‘Highest I.Q.,’ but that credential did not impress the public when she answered
this question from a reader.” She gave the right answer, but still many
mathematicians argued.
Let us look at this now step by step. Gradually, the result will become clear.
There are two donkeys and one car behind these doors.
You must try to get the car. You select Door #3 (Fig. 4.2.)
Figure 4.2.

Monty Hall opens one of the doors that you did not select, and exposes a
donkey. (Fig. 4.3.)
Figure 4.3.
Monty asks: “Do you still want your first-choice door, or do you want to
switch to the other closed door”?
To help make a decision, consider an extreme case:
Suppose there were one thousand doors instead of just three doors. (See fig.
4.4.)
Figure 4.4.
You choose Door No. 1,000. How likely is it that you chose the right door?
Very unlikely, since the probability of getting the right door is 
How likely is it that the car is behind one of the other doors? (Fig. 4.5.)
Very likely: 
Figure 4.5.
These are all “very likely” doors!

Figure 4.6.
Monty Hall now opens all of the doors (2 – 999) except one (say, Door No. 1)
and shows that each one had a donkey. (Fig. 4.6.)
A “very likely” door is left: Door No. 1.
We are now ready to answer the question. Which is a better choice:
Door No. 1,000 (“Very unlikely” door), or
Door No. 1 (“Very likely” door)?
The answer is now obvious. We ought to select the “very likely” door, which
means “switching” is the better strategy for the audience participant to follow.
In the extreme case, it is much easier to see the best strategy than had we tried
to analyze the situation with the three doors. The principle is the same in either
situation. Here we see a simple solution to a vexing problem that seems to
permeate society, even beyond mathematicians. This problem has generated
excitement throughout our culture so much so that an entire book has been
written on the subject: The Monty Hall Problem: The Remarkable Story of
Math's Most Contentious Brain Teaser, by Jason Rosenhouse.6 If you are
interested, this book will not only explain the problem, as we did above, but it
will also present a variety of variations that lead very nicely to an introduction to
probability, a branch of mathematics becoming increasingly more popular in
today's technological world. Another form of “gambling” or “gaming” can be
seen from the investments viewpoint—our next focus.
BUSINESS APPLICATIONS
The Fibonacci numbers (1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144,…) seem to pop

up in the most unexpected places. As we consider the volatile world of the stock
market, we find them there as well.
Investor confidence was at an all-time low after the stock market's Great
Crash of 1929, whereupon many Americans viewed the stock market as a costly
roll of the dice. However, a little-known, albeit successful, accountant and
engineer named Ralph Nelson Elliott (1871–1948) decided to pore over decades
of stock performance charts and trace trader movement in an attempt to make
sense of the crash. As his research progressed, distinct and repetitive zigzagging
patterns began to emerge as Elliott studied that ups and downs or, rather, ebb and
flow, of market behavior. He dubbed these patterns “waves” and categorized
them as either “impulsive” or “corrective” waves that could be measured and
used to forecast market behavior.7
In a letter to Charles Collins, the publisher of a national market newsletter of
the day with an extensive following, the enthusiastic Elliott wrote that there was
“a much-needed complement to Dow theory,” which he called his “wave
theory.”8 This correspondence began in November 1934 when Elliott wrote to
Collins about his “discoveries,” with the hope that he would find support from
Collins. Collins was impressed by the accuracy of Elliott's analysis and invited
him to Detroit to explain the process in greater detail. Although Elliott's
insistence that all market decisions should be based on wave theory prevented
Collins from directly employing Elliott, he did help him to establish an office on
Wall Street. Later, in 1938, Collins wrote a booklet, under Elliott's name, titled
The Wave Principle. Elliott went on to further publicize his theory through
various letters and magazines, including the Financial World magazine. Then, in
1946, Elliott expanded on “the wave principle” with a book called Nature's Law:
The Secret of the Universe.9
Elliott's famous and influential booklet, The Wave Principle, is based on the
belief that market behavior should not be seen as random or chaotic but rather as
a natural reflection of investor confidence—or lack thereof—(impulsive waves)
and self-sustaining market mechanisms (corrective waves). In layman's terms,
Elliott believed that the market, like “other things in the universe,” moves in
predictable cycles once its patterns of behavior have been established and made
visible to the trained eye. At this point, it became apparent that Fibonacci
numbers determined the pattern.
What may be surprising is just how pervasive Fibonacci numbers are in
Elliott's analysis of the stock market. After tracing most bear markets, he found
that they move in a series of 2 impulsive waves and 1 corrective wave, for a total
of 3 waves. On the other hand, his research showed that a bull market usually
