
jumps upward in 3 impulsive waves and 2 corrective waves for a total of 5
waves. A complete cycle would be the total of these moves, or 8 waves. Recall,
the Fibonacci numbers are 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144…The
Fibonacci sequence's relationship to the wave principle does not end there.
Elliott's wave principle also states that each “major” wave can be further
subdivided into “minor” and “intermediate” waves. A regular bear market, where
the prices are falling, has 13 intermediate waves. And as now would be
expected, a bull market, where the prices are rising, has 21 intermediate waves,
for a total of 34. Continuing on with the sequence, there are 55 minor waves in a
bear market and 89 in a bull market for a total of 144. Elliott, himself, was not at
all surprised to find the Fibonacci sequence while tracing these market waves, as
he had always believed that, “the stock market is a creation of man and
therefore, reflects human idiosyncrasy.” However, it was only when Elliott
began to study the relationships between the size of the waves for his second
book, Nature's Law: The Secret of the Universe, that he realized his new
discoveries were based on “a law of Nature known to the designers of the Great
Pyramid ‘Gizeh,’ which may have been constructed 5,000 years ago,” which is
based on the golden ratio and which, in turn, can be shown to be generated by
the ratio of consecutive Fibonacci numbers. Recall that two quantities are in the
golden ratio if their ratio is the same as the ratio of their sum to the larger of the
two quantities.
Elliott believed that this famous golden ratio along with other Fibonacci-
generated ratios could be used to predict stock prices with astounding accuracy.
In order to understand how he reached this conclusion, it is important to
investigate what these Fibonacci ratios are. Consider the results when dividing
Fibonacci numbers by their three immediate successors. Can you see a pattern
emerge after the first several calculations? (See table 4.4.)

Table 4.4.
It is clear that after the first several rows, the results in each of the preceding
rows approximate 0.6180, 0.3820, and the golden ratio, 0.2360. Written as
percentages, these numbers translate to: 61.8 percent, 38.2 percent, and 23.6
percent and are called Fibonacci percentages. (It is interesting to notice a very
surprising property: The sum of the second two percentages equals the first
(23.60 + 38.20 = 61.80), and the first two percentages (38.20 and 61.80) happen
to have a sum of 100 percent.
Elliott's premise, or Fibonacci indicator, is that the ratio, or the proportional
relationship, between two waves could be used to indicate stock prices. He found
that an initial wave up in price was usually followed by a second wave down, or
what market analysts call a “retracement” of the initial surge. Upon closer
inspection, these retracements seemed, more often than not, to be Fibonacci
percentages of the initial price surge, with 61.8 percent as the highest
retracement. Once again, the golden ratio reigns supreme!10
While many of today's market analysts incorporate wave patterns and
retracements to forecast the market, some analysts take Fibonacci numbers a step

further. There are market analysts who scan previous dates and results looking
for Fibonacci numbers. There might be 34 months or 55 months between a major
high or low, or as few as 21 or 13 days between minor fluctuations. A trader
might look for repetitive patterns and try to establish a Fibonacci relationship
between dates to help forecast the future market.
Before you scoff at the importance of Fibonacci numbers, consider that Elliott,
at the age of sixty-seven, and without the aid of any computers, forecast to the
exact day the end of a bear market decline from 1933 to 1935. As for the golden
ratio, consider also the vehicle by which many of these trades are made
nowadays: the credit card. It measures 55 mm by 86 mm and is very close to
being a golden rectangle (actually, it's 3 mm short in the length from fitting the
Fibonacci ratio approximation).
More recently, a book by Robert Fischer called Fibonacci Applications and
Strategies for Traders11 expounds on the use of the Fibonacci numbers in
investment strategies, and it is a complete, hands-on resource that shows how to
measure price and time signals quickly and with accuracy using the logarithmic
spiral, and how to act on these analyses. This innovative trading guide first takes
a fresh look at the classic principles and applications of the Elliott wave theory,
then introduces the Fibonacci sequence, exploring its appearance in the many
related fields and then in stock and commodity trading.
Fischer then explains how the series is used to measure equity and commodity
price swings and to forecast short- and long-term correction targets. You can
learn how to accurately analyze price targets on market extensions, and how, by
using the author's logarithmic spirals, to easily develop price and time analyses
with some precision. The book claims to enable you to calculate and predict key
turning points in the commodity market, analyze business and economic cycles,
and discover entry and exit rules that make disciplined trading possible and
profitable. As you can see, even today, the Fibonacci numbers continue to
fascinate us in the investment field.
MATHEMATICS OF LIFE INSURANCE
Although it might feel macabre, the whole field of life insurance is based on
mathematical probability and statistics. Most people who buy life insurance are
relatively clueless about how the costs are calculated. We will consider a simple
case here just to give you an idea of what lies behind the premiums you pay.
Let's begin with the following problem: Out of 200,000 men alive at age forty,
199,100 lived to become age forty-one. What is the probability that a forty-year-

old insured man will live at least one year? What is the probability that he will
die within one year?
This problem should also begin to make you aware of the applicability of
probability theory to life insurance. Life insurance companies must be able to
measure the financial risks of insuring particular people. To decide on the
premiums, a life insurance company must know how many people in any group
are expected to die within a specific time frame. They do this by collecting data
about the number of people (from each age group) who died in the past within
the time frame being considered. Since the data is collected from a large number
of events, the law of large numbers applies. This law states that with a large
number of experiments, the ratio of the number of successes to the number of
trials gets very close to the theoretical probability.
Although it sounds morbid to those of us outside of the industry, life insurance
companies construct mortality tables based on past deaths in order to predict the
number of people who will die in each age group. Merely as a sample we will
use a portion of the Commissioners 1958 Standard Ordinary Mortality Table
