Analogously, once again we have a weighted average, which can be seen
when we consider the grade a student deserves. Suppose the student scored 100
percent on nine of ten tests in a semester, and on one test scored only 50 percent.
Would it be fair to assume that this student's performance for the term should be
graded as 
 percent? The reaction to this suggestion will tend toward
applying appropriate weight to the two scores in consideration. The 100 percent
was achieved nine times as often as the 50 percent and therefore ought to get the
appropriate weight. Thus, a proper calculation of the student's average ought to
be 
 percent. This clearly appears to be more just!
We then might ask what happens if the rates to be averaged are not multiples
of one another? For the speed problem above, one could find the time “going”
and the time “returning” to get the total time, and then, with the total distance,
calculate the “total rate,” which is, in fact, the average rate.
There is a more efficient way to handle this kind of a problem, and that is the

highlight of this section. We are going to introduce a concept called the
harmonic mean, which is the mean of a harmonic sequence. The name harmonic
may come from the fact that one such harmonic sequence is 
 and if you
take guitar strings of these relative lengths and strum them together, a
harmonious sound results.
This frequently misunderstood mean (or average) usually causes confusion.
To avoid this, once we identify that we need to find the average of rates (i.e., the
harmonic mean), we have a simple formula for calculating the correct average,
namely, the harmonic mean for rates over the same base. In the above situation,
the rates were for the same distance for both parts of the round trip.
The formula for the harmonic mean for two rates a and b is 
 and for three
rates, a, b, and c, the harmonic mean is 
You can see the pattern evolving, so that for four rates the harmonic mean is 
 and so on.
Applying this to the above speed problem gives us 
Now let's consider the following problem:
The problem: On Monday, a plane makes a round-trip flight from New
York City to Washington and back, with an average speed of 300 miles
per hour. The next day, Tuesday, there is a wind of constant speed (50
miles per hour) and direction (blowing from New York City to
Washington). With the same speed setting as on Monday, this same
plane makes the same round trip on Tuesday. Will the Tuesday trip
require more time, less time, or the same time as the Monday trip?
We should notice that the only thing that has changed is the help and
hindrance of the wind (the wind will aid the plane's fight in one direction and
hinder it in the opposite direction). All other controllable factors are the same:
distances, speed regulation, airplane's conditions, and so on. An expected
response is that the two round-trip flights ought to be the same, especially since
the same wind is helping and hindering two equal legs of a round-trip flight.
But you should realize that the two legs of the “windy trip” require different
amounts of time, which should lead you to the notion that the two speeds of this
trip cannot be weighted equally as they were done for different lengths of time.
Therefore, the time for each leg should be calculated and then appropriately
apportioned to the related speed.
We can use the harmonic mean formula to find the average speed for the
windy trip. The harmonic mean is 
 which is slower than the no-

wind trip of 300 mph. What a surprise!! Here we have another example of how a
little common sense through mathematical thinking lets us navigate our world
more accurately.
WHAT WE NEED TO KNOW ABOUT AVERAGES
There are lots of types of averages, which in various ways measure a point of
central tendency. There is the usual average, known in mathematics as the
arithmetic mean. Then there is a geometric mean, and a harmonic mean, which
we just discussed. However, there other measures of central tendency, such as
the mode of the set of data, which refers to that item or score that comes up most
frequently. And then there is the median, which is the midpoint of a spectrum of
data, regardless of where the strong points or weak points are located. However,
before we compare the three types of means mentioned above, we need to dispel
the use of the word “average,” as it has been used so frequently in sports,
particularly in baseball.
Although baseball batting averages seem to permeate sports discussions, few
people realize that these “baseball batting averages” aren't really averages in the
true sense of the term; they are actually percentages. Most people, especially
after trying to explain this concept, will begin to realize that it is not an average
in the way they usually define an “average”—the arithmetic mean. It might be
good to search the sports section of the local newspaper to find two baseball
players who currently have the same batting average but who have achieved
their respective averages with a different number of hits. We shall use a
hypothetical example here.
Consider two players: David and Lisa, each with a batting average of .667.
David achieved his batting average by getting 20 hits for 30 at bats, while Lisa
achieved her batting average by getting 2 hits for 3 at bats.
On the next day, both performed equally, getting 1 hit for 2 at bats (for a .500
batting average). You might expect that they then still have the same batting
average at the end of the day. But let's examine this further by calculating their
respective averages:
David now has 20 + 1 = 21 hits for 30 + 2 = 32 at bats; this gives him a 
 batting average.
Lisa now has 2 + 1 = 3 hits for 3 + 2 = 5 at bats; this gives her a 
 batting
average.
Surprise! They do not have equal batting averages.
Suppose we consider the next day, during which Lisa performs considerably

better than David does. Lisa gets 2 hits for 3 at bats, while David gets 1 hit for 3
at bats. We shall now calculate their respective averages:
David has 21 + 1 = 22 hits for 32 + 3 = 35 at bats, giving him a batting
average of 
Lisa has 3 + 2 = 5 hits for 5 + 3 = 8 at bats, giving her a batting average of 
