Amazingly, despite Lisa's much-superior performance on this day, her batting
average, which was the same as David's at the start, is still lower. There is much
to be learned from this misuse of the word “average,” but, more important, from
this discussion you can find an appreciation for the notion of varying weights of
items being averaged.
COMPARING MEASURES OF CENTRAL TENDENCY
In mathematics and in statistics we frequently use measures of central tendency
—that is, we use various means such as the arithmetic mean (in common terms:
the average), the geometric mean, and the harmonic mean, as mentioned above.
Our knowledge of them has been traced back to ancient times. As a matter of
fact, the historian Iamblichus of Chalcis (ca. 245–325 CE) reported that after a
visit to Mesopotamia, Pythagoras (ca. 580/560–ca. 496/480 BCE) brought back
to his followers a knowledge of these three measures of central tendency. This
may be one reason why today they are often referred to as Pythagorean means.
We tend to use these means in statistical analyses, but when we inspect them and
compare them algebraically and geometrically, some rather-enlightening
properties are revealed.
Let's begin by introducing these three means for two values a and b as
follows:12
The arithmetic mean is: 
The geometric mean is: 
 and
The harmonic mean is: 
For convenience throughout this discussion we will use these representations
as we discuss them in greater detail:
The Arithmetic Mean
Before we compare the relative magnitude of these measures of central tendency,

or means, we ought to see what they actually represent. The arithmetic mean is
simply the commonly used “average” of the data being considered—that is, the
sum of the data divided by the number of data items included in the sum. In a
simple example, if we want to find the average—or arithmetic mean—of the two
values 30 and 60, we take their sum, 90, and divide it by 2 to get 45.
We can also see the arithmetic mean as taking us to the middle of an
arithmetic sequence—that is, a sequence with a common difference between
terms—such as 2, 4, 6, 8, 10. To get the arithmetic mean within this sequence,
we divide the sum by the number of numbers being averaged. Here we have: 
 which, as we expected, happens to be the middle number in the
sequence of an odd number of values.
The Harmonic Mean
If we take an arithmetic sequence such as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and then take the
reciprocals, we have a harmonic sequence: 
 We can tie the harmonic mean
to the arithmetic mean by simply indicating that the harmonic mean is the
reciprocal of the arithmetic mean of the reciprocals of the numbers. We would
do this step by step as follows:
To get the harmonic mean HM(1, 2, 3, 4, 5) of a given sequence 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
we first find the arithmetic mean, 
 of the reciprocals of the sequence,
that is,
We then take the reciprocal of this value to get the harmonic mean,
Another way of looking at the same procedure is the following:
Where the harmonic mean is particularly useful is to find the average of rates
over a common base, as we have seen in the earlier discussion in this chapter.
The Geometric Mean

The geometric mean gets its name from a simple interpretation in geometry. A
rather-common application of the geometric mean is obtained when we consider
the altitude to the hypotenuse of a right triangle, which, in figure 4.7, is CD, the
altitude to the hypotenuse of right triangle ABC.
Figure 4.7.
From the triangle similarity ∆ADC ~ ∆CDB, we get 
 or 
 This then
gives us h=√pq, which has h as the geometric mean between p and q.
The geometric mean is also the “middle” of a geometric sequence. Take, for
example, the geometric sequence, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32. (Note that a geometric
sequence is one with a common factor between consecutive terms.) We can
extend taking the square root when we are averaging two items, to taking the
fifth root when considering five items, Therefore, to get the geometric mean of
these 
five 
numbers, 
we 
find 
the 
fifth 
root 
of 
their 
product: 
 which is the middle number when the sequence has an
odd number of numbers.
Comparing the Three Means Algebraically
Before we present some unusual geometric methods for comparing the
magnitude of these three means, we shall show how these three means may be
compared in size using simple algebra.
For the two non-negative numbers a and b,
(a – b)2 ≥ 0
a2 – 2ab + b2 ≥ 0

Add 4ab to both sides:
a2 + 2ab + b2 ≥ 4ab
(a + b)2 ≥ 4ab
Take the positive square root of both sides:
a+b≥2 √ab
or 
This implies that the arithmetic mean of the two numbers a and b is greater
than or equal to the geometric mean. (Equality is true only if a = b.)
Beginning, as we did above, and then continuing along as shown below, we
