get our next desired result: a comparison of the geometric mean and the
harmonic mean.
For the two non-negative numbers a and b,
(a − b)2 ≥ 0
a2 − 2ab + b2 ≥ 0
Add 4ab to both sides:
a2 + 2ab + b2 ≥ 4ab
(a + b)2 ≥ 4ab
Multiply both sides by ab:
ab (a + b)2 ≥ 4a2b2
Divide both sides by (a + b)2:
Take the positive square root of both sides:
This tells us that the geometric mean of the two numbers a and b is greater

than or equal to the harmonic mean. (Here, equality holds whenever one of these
numbers is zero, or if a = b).
We can, therefore, conclude that arithmetic mean ≥ geometric mean ≥
harmonic mean.
Comparing the Three Means Geometrically—Using a Right-Angled Triangle
The comparison of the three means in terms of their relative size was known to
the ancient Greeks, as we find in the writings of Pappus of Alexandria (ca. 290–
350 CE). We will now embark on a geometric journey to consider various ways
in which the relative sizes of these means can be compared using simple
geometric relationships.
In figure 4.8, we have a right triangle with an altitude drawn to the
hypotenuse, where the hypotenuse is partitioned by the altitude into two
segments of lengths a and b, and a ≤ b. Here we show the line segments that can
represent the three means, and where we can then “see” their relative sizes.
(Note, the harmonic mean is denoted with Ⓗ; the geometric mean, with Ⓖ; and
the arithmetic mean, with Ⓐ.)
That is, a Ⓗ b ≤ a Ⓖ b ≤ a Ⓐ b.
Figure 4.8.
To justify our visual observation, we begin by considering figure 4.9, where
triangle ABC is inscribed in a circle and AB is a diameter of the circle, implying
that ABC is a right triangle. We construct the altitude on AB and join the center

of the circle, M, with C. By drawing a line from point D perpendicular to MC,
we obtain another right triangle, CED. We notice that CE is a leg of right triangle
CED; therefore, CE ≤ CD. Since the radius, MB or MA, of this circle is longer
than the altitude to the hypotenuse of the triangle ABC, we have CD ≤ MB.
Combining these inequalities gives us CE ≤ CD ≤ MB. Our task is to show that
these three segments, whose relative lengths we have established, actually
represent the three means of a and b as we earlier stated.
Figure 4.9.
First, we know that AB is the diameter of the circle with center at M and radii 
 which is the arithmetic mean between a and b.
To find the geometric mean of a and b, we begin with the altitude, CD, to the
hypotenuse of right triangle ABC, which partitions the right triangle into two
similar triangles (∆ADC ~ ∆CDB); therefore, 
 which leads to CD2 = a · b;
thus, CD = √a·b which is the geometric mean of a and b.
From the similar triangles (∆CDM ~ ∆ECD) located in right triangle CDM, we
can get CD2 = MC · CE, which yields
which is the harmonic mean.
Having now justified how the line segments, which we size-ordered as CE ≤
CD ≤ MB, can represent the various means of a and b, we have therefore shown
geometrically that 

Thus, we have considered some of the applications of probability and statistics
as they appear in our world and culture. This is merely the beginning of the
simple applications that can give you a sense of how mathematics can be used to
measure our interests and our environment. Much of this is subsumed by
computers, through which we are merely given an answer to a question. But this
is what goes on behind the scenes, and we are better off knowing why things are
the way they are so that we can make intelligent decisions.

When you engage in sports, typically, the farthest thing from your mind is using
mathematics. You need to concentrate on the skills and strategies for winning the
game. However, if you become aware of some of the underlying aspects of how
mathematics can optimize sports-related moves, you have a distinct advantage
over your opponent. For example, you can fine-tune the arc in which to throw a
basketball so that it will best reach the hoop. Or you can better determine where
a billiard ball should hit the cushion to reach its desired goal, which can prove
quite helpful to winning the game. Even physical attributes of some toys can be
explained mathematically. In this chapter, we will reveal to you some of these
aspects of mathematical applications in sports and games.
THE BEST ANGLE TO THROW A BALL
Throwing or hitting a ball as far as possible is an important skill in many sports,
including baseball, football, and golf. In some sports, this is actually the only
thing that matters. This is the case most notably for shot put and hammer
throwing, which are two sports that belong to the oldest competitions of the
modern Olympic Games. Their origins date back at least to the Middle Ages,
when soldiers hurled cannonballs as a competitive challenge. The other two
throwing events in track-and-field competitions, the discus throw and the javelin
throw, were even among the events of the original Olympic Games, which were
held in Olympia in ancient Greece throughout classical antiquity—from 776
BCE to the fourth century CE.1
Regardless of whether you want to hit a home run, play a drive shot toward
the green, or kick a field goal from a great distance, being aware of some basic
mathematical properties of ballistic trajectories will be helpful in improving your

technique. A ballistic trajectory is the path that a thrown ball or a launched
missile without propulsion will take under the action of gravity, if aerodynamic
drag is neglected. Although a thrown football, for instance, will not exactly
follow a ballistic trajectory because of aerodynamic drag, it is still a fairly good
approximation for many purposes. When you throw a ball, there are basically
two parameters of the trajectory that you can control: the initial speed and the
initial angle, measured from the horizontal. We will not consider spin, since it
would have no effect on the trajectory, given that air resistance is not being taken
into account. Moreover, even with aerodynamic drag, an additional spinning
