motion of the ball would not increase the range anyway; only the shape of the
trajectory would change. A ballistic (drag-free) trajectory, however, is uniquely
determined by the initial speed and the angle at which the so-called projectile is
released. Of course, a higher initial speed will also increase the range, but what
about the angle? Experience tells us that neither a nearly horizontal path nor a
nearly vertical path will be a good choice for maximizing the flight distance.
Figure 5.1 shows ballistic trajectories for fixed initial speed but different launch
angles. Each curve represents the path a projectile would take for a certain
launch angle. These curves are parabolas, which are the common curves
presented in high-school algebra.
Figure 5.1. Ballistic trajectories for different launching angles.
Clearly, the optimal angle is somewhere “in the middle” between 0° and 90°.
You may have been told in physics class that the optimum angle is, in fact,
exactly 45°. We will help justify this with the aid of one of the famous fields of
mathematics: trigonometry. The initial velocity (a quantity having both
magnitude and direction) can be represented by a vector, V, that we decompose

into a horizontal component Vx, and a vertical component, Vy (see fig. 5.2a).
Denoting the launch angle by α, we then have Vx = V · cosα and Vy = V · sinα,
where V is the length of the vector V.
Figure 5.2.
Since we ignore aerodynamic drag, gravitation is the only force acting on the
ball during the flight. It pulls the projectile toward the center of the earth with a
constant acceleration, 
 opposite to the y-axis in our coordinate system.
Thus, if you launch the ball at time t = 0, the vertical component Vy will be
diminished by the amount g · t at time t (see fig. 5.2b). The projectile ascends as
long as g · t is smaller than its initial vertical speed, Vy. It reaches the highest
point of the trajectory when Vy = g · t, implying 
 From here on, that is,
for 
 gravity dominates and the ball approaches the ground. Since
parabolas are always symmetric, we can easily compute the total flight time, T. It
must be twice the time at which the maximal height occurs; that is, 
Hence the longest flight time would be obtained for α = 90°, but as this would
correspond to launching the projectile vertically upward, no horizontal distance
would be gained. So, how can we calculate the distance the projectile travels
before it hits the ground? In our drag-free model, the horizontal speed will not

change during the flight, since there is no force acting in x-direction. The total
horizontal distance traveled, D, is therefore, 
where we have substituted 
 for T. To find the optimum angle, we only have
to determine for which value of α the horizontal distance, D, attains a maximum,
that is, which value of α maximizes the product cosα · sinα. This can be seen
quite easily by invoking a geometrical picture for this problem. Consider a right
triangle inscribed in a quarter circle of radius 1, as we show in figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3.
Since the length of the hypotenuse is 1, the sides of the inscribed triangle are
of length cosα and sinα, respectively. The product cosα · sinα thus represents the
area of a rectangle inscribed in a quarter circle. Maximizing this product means
maximizing the area of the rectangle. Clearly, the inscribed rectangle with the
largest area is a square, so the optimum angle must be α = 45º.
Until now, we have assumed that the projectile is launched directly from the
ground, that is, its trajectory starts (and ends) at zero height. Of course, this is
not a very realistic scenario for sports moves that involve throwing (rather than,
say, kicking). When we throw a ball, we usually stand upright, so the trajectory
of the ball will not start on ground level. Taking this into account, the optimal
launch angle turns out to be slightly less than 45º. To see this, consider a ball that
is released at the point P with an initial speed V, as we show it in figure 5.4.

Figure 5.4.
How can we decide whether a trajectory starting at this point with speed V is
optimal in the sense that the horizontal distance traveled will be larger than for
any other ballistic curve with the same initial speed? We know that if the ball
would be launched from ground level, the optimum angle would be exactly 45°.
If we can find a parabolic path starting from zero height at an angle of 45° and
passing through the point P with speed V, then the angle α of this curve at point
P will represent the optimum release angle for a trajectory starting at position P.
As can be seen in figure 5.4, this angle obviously measures less than 45°.
However, calculating its value for a given initial height above ground level and a
given initial speed would require us to delve substantially deeper into
trigonometry, so we will only present the result for a typical situation, namely,
shot-putting. Here, the idealized zero-drag model is well justified, since the
considerable mass of the shot renders air resistance negligible. In shot-putting,
the optimum release angle for a typical release height, and initial speed for a
world-class throw, would be 42°.
Of course, even for world-class athletes it is impossible to control the release
angle this accurately. Moreover, the structure of the human body favors certain
characteristics, so meeting the theoretically best release angle might come at the
cost of lower initial speed. However, most non-professionals would tend to
release a ball or a javelin at a significantly lower angle than 42º. Therefore, if
you are active in any of the sports mentioned earlier, then the mathematical
considerations presented in this section might compel you to experiment with
your release angle, potentially improving your range.
OPTIMIZING YOUR SHOT AT SOCCER
Naturally, there is a good amount of natural talent required to play the game of
soccer. When attempting to take a shot on net, there are times when a player will

take the ball along the sideline as he runs toward the goal. The question is, At
which point along the sideline would the player have the best advantage to kick
for a goal? Once again, with mathematics we can provide information as to
which point along the sidelines a kicker would have the largest angle to shoot a
goal. Of course, during the game such calculations are not possible. Yet it is
interesting to see that there is a point along the sidelines from which a kicker has
the largest angle to shoot a goal, thereby providing him the optimal position for
that attempt. Let's consider a portion of a soccer field as shown in figure 5.5. In
this diagram, the net is indicated by points P1 and P2; the sidelines are the
parallel lines AB and CD; and there are four sample points along AB indicating
different locations at which the player can try to aim for a goal. Assume that the
