player is running along the sideline marked AB and while doing so must
determine the point at which his chance of shooting a goal is greatest, in other
words, at what point the angle to the goal is largest.
Figure 5.5.
In figure 5.6 we see the various angles that he would have to select from.
Which of these would be the largest? And how can we determine the point on
the sideline that determines this optimal angle?

Figure 5.6.
In order to determine the point at which the angle is the largest, we would rely
on theorems that were an integral part of the high-school geometry course. That
is, we recall that an inscribed angle of a circle is measured by one-half its
intercepted arc, and that an exterior angle formed by two secants (that is, lines
intersecting the circle in two points and extending beyond the circle) has a
measure one-half the difference of the intercepted arcs.
Let's see how this helps us determine the optimum point along the sideline.
We notice in figure 5.7 that angle P1XP2 is an inscribed angle and is one-half of
the measure of arc P1P2. Whereas the angles P1YP2 and P1ZP2 each have a
measure that is less than the measure of arc P1P2, since they are angles formed
by two secants, which have measures equal to one-half the difference of their
intercepted arcs, that is, one-half arc P1P2 minus the other intercepted arcs,
respectively.
Therefore, the optimal point at which the angle is the greatest is the point at
which the circle containing points P1 and P2 is tangent to the sideline, which is
shown as point X in figure 5.7.

Figure 5.7.
What remains for us now is to determine how we construct a circle that
contains two given points (in this case, P1 and P2) and is tangent to a given line
(in this case, YXZ). To do this, we will work backward from the end product to
see what relationships exist, and then construct it going forward.
We will consider the construction using figure 5.8, in which the circle
containing the two points P1 and P2 is tangent to the line L. If the solution were
available, we would see that the line containing chord P1P2 meets the given line
at a point, A, which is an external point from which a tangent and secant, AT1
and AP2P1, respectively, are drawn to circle O1.

Figure 5.8.
We recall that in such a situation the tangent length is the mean proportional
between the length of the whole secant and the length of its external segment. To
construct the mean proportional between two given line segments, we merely
construct the altitude to the hypotenuse of a right triangle, where the foot of the
altitude separates the hypotenuse into the two segments for which the altitude is
then the mean proportional. This can be seen in figure 5.9, where AC is the mean
proportional between AP1 and AP2. This is written as 
Figure 5.9.
Now we revert back to figure 5.8 and let P1P2 intersect line L at A, and
construct the mean proportion, AC, between AP1 and AP2 (using the right
triangle in figure 5.9), and mark along L, on both sides of A, the points T1 and T2

so that AT1 = AT2 = AC. Thus, T1 and T2 are tangent points of the required circles
on line L. The centers of these circles are on both the perpendicular bisector of
P1P2 and they are also on the perpendicular to L at T1 and T2. Thus, we have
found a method of constructing the circle that would be tangent to the sideline
and also contain the endpoints of the goal.
Although this discussion of locating the optimal point from which to shoot a
goal along the sideline is a bit complicated, it demonstrates how simple high-
school geometry can answer a question that a soccer player might ask himself
when running down the sideline.
A GAME OF ANGLES
“Tennis is a game of angles. You never have time to figure the angles. It's
practiced to the extent that it becomes an instinct. You just know where to put
the ball. You just feel it. It has been computed into your brain so many times—it
is there.”2 This is a quote from Billie Jean King (1943–), one of the most
successful tennis players of all time. She won thirty-nine Grand Slam titles,
including twelve singles, and is a former World No. 1 player, and in 2006, the
USTA National Tennis Center in New York City was renamed the USTA Billie
Jean King National Tennis Center in her honor. Undoubtedly, she knows what
she is talking about when she refers to tennis as a “game of angles.” For
professional tennis players, mastering the geometric rules of tennis without
having to think about them is no less important than technique, hitting power,
and physical strength. Many amateur players underestimate the significance of
basic geometric considerations for their success on the court. Tennis tactics and
patterns of play are to a very large extent dictated by a geometrical analysis of
the position of the players in relation to the court and the possible paths of the
ball. “Knowing where to put the ball,” that is, understanding and following the
geometric rules of a winning strategy, is essential for making the most of your
abilities in this sport. We will use geometry from the school curriculum to reveal
some of these rules.

Figure 5.10.
A tennis court is a rectangle that is 78 feet long and 36 feet wide, placed on
flat ground with additional clear space outside its boundaries. (See fig. 5.10.)
The length is divided in half by a net. The full width of the rectangle is only used
in doubles matches. The singles sidelines together with the baselines define the
playable area for singles matches (a rectangle of length 78 feet and width 27
feet). The four rectangles around the center of the court are called the service
boxes. Every point in tennis starts with a serve, for which the server must stand
behind the baseline, between the center mark and a sideline. For a legal serve,
the ball must travel over the net (without touching it) and land in the diagonally
opposite service box. The receiver must hit the ball before it has bounced twice
and return it onto the other player's half of the court (if the receiver fails, the
point goes to the server). A successful return starts a rally, in which the players
alternately hit the ball across the net. The task is simply to hit one more legal
stroke than the opponent. To achieve this goal, there are basically two different
strategies you may pursue. A defensive style focuses on returning every ball and
waiting for the opponent to make a mistake, while an offensive style means to
avoid long rallies by trying to hit aggressive shots that the opponent is unable to
return. A legal shot that is not returned by the opponent is called a winner.
Although many professional players can be roughly fit into one of the two
