categories, they will adapt their style of play to the opponent and the surface
(hard material, clay, or grass) and play sometimes more offensively and
sometimes more defensively, depending on the situation. If you go for a winner,
you have to minimize your opponent's time to react and maximize the distance
he has to run to reach the ball. The opponent's time to react can be reduced by
hitting the ball early after it bounces (by taking it on the rise or even before it
bounces) and/or with high speed. Key to increasing the distance between the
opponent and the ball are shots at sharp angles, away from the opponent.

Before we continue, we will make two simplifying assumptions. First, we
assume that the projection of the ball's trajectory onto the court is always a
straight line; that is, we neglect possible sidespin of the ball. Second, we will
only consider shots that land between the service line and the baseline. Hitting
shorter is not a good idea anyway, since it would give your opponent a good
opportunity to attack, unless you play a perfect drop shot. For a drop shot, you
must hit the ball softy and with backspin (rotating backward), so that it barely
clears the net and then “drops” on the opponent's half of the court, bouncing low.
A good drop shot requires great touch. It is most effective if the opponent is far
away from the net and is taken by surprise. However, most of the time it is best
to hit the ball “deep,” that is, close to the opponent's baseline, keeping the
opponent in a defensive position.
The first basic rule for an offensive play is to move closer into the court,
whenever it is possible. As soon as your opponent hits short, you should move in
and take the ball on the rise. This will reduce your opponent's time to react. But,
most important, the closer you move in, the steeper the angles you can create.
This is illustrated in figure 5.11. If you are in a neutral position, slightly behind
the center of your own baseline (position A), there is a much smaller range of
angles you can hit without too much risk than when you take a few steps forward
into the court before hitting the ball (position B). Trying to hit a winner from
behind the baseline is most of the time not a good idea. From there, you cannot
create steep angles. Moreover, the ball will travel longer and give the opponent
more time to react and reach the ball.
Figure 5.11.
If you are in a position closer to one of the sidelines than to the center line, it
is often better to hit the ball crosscourt, that is, diagonally, than along the
sideline, or “down the line” in tennis jargon. The tennis net is about 15 percent
lower at the center than it is at the ends. In addition, by the Pythagorean theorem,
the length of the diagonal of a singles court is 
 feet, which is more

than 5 percent longer than down the line. (See fig. 5.10.) Cross-court shots make
the ball pass over the lower portion of the net and along the diagonal of the court
(see fig. 5.12). It is safer to hit the ball crosscourt than down the line, since the
chances that the ball will hit the net or land outside the playing area are
considerably smaller. Thus, crosscourt shots permit a wider range of tolerance, in
both height and length of the shot. Shots down the line are generally riskier,
since they are more likely to go wide or into the net. However, there is also
another reason why it is dangerous to hit the ball down the line in a groundstroke
rally (with both players behind the baseline). If you hit the ball down the sideline
and your opponent is quick enough to set up a controlled return, you open up the
court for your opponent and put him in a geometrically advantageous position.
(See fig. 5.12, diagram on the left.) Then, to cover the court against your
opponent's potential returns, you have to run a long distance to the middle of his
range of angles. If you hit crosscourt instead, you are already at or close to a
position from which you can cover most of the possible shots from your
opponent. (See fig. 5.12, diagram on the right.) Since you don't have to move
very far along the baseline to get in a good position to await your opponent's
return, you save energy and you will have more time to set up your next shot, a
fact that is compounded further because your shot has a longer distance to travel
along the diagonal path.
Figure 5.12.
Many amateur players run back to the center mark of the baseline after each
stroke, because they think that this is the favorable position to cover as much of

the court as possible against their opponent's potential return shots. Yet this is
not always true; it depends on the opponent's position on the court. Logically, the
best position during a rally is slightly behind the baseline and on an imaginary
line that bisects the angle representing the opponent's range of possible shots,
indicated by the shaded triangles in figure 5.13. The lines OA and OB represent
the broadest returns the opponent may hit. To find your optimal position, you
have to bisect angle AOB and place yourself exactly on this bisector, slightly
behind the baseline. In figure 5.13, we indicate the optimal spots for different
positions of the opponent. Of course, it is impossible to mentally bisect the angle
formed by all possible returns in real time, during the rally on the court. But if
you take a closer look at the diagrams in figure 5.13, you will find that in all
three situations the bisector runs very close to the T on your side of the court,
that is, the point of intersection of the service line and the center service line.
From this, you can derive a “rule of thumb” to quickly place yourself at least
very close to the ideal spot. You just have to visualize an imaginary line from the
opponent's point of contact through the T on your side of the court. If you stand
on this imaginary line, you optimize your chances to get the next shot.
Figure 5.13.
Finally, we want to apply geometry to the situation in which one of the players
stands at the net and hits the ball before it bounces on the ground. A shot hit
before the ball bounces on your side of the court is called a volley. When your
opponent is in a defensive position (far behind the baseline), moving close to the
net and preparing for a volley makes sense for two reasons: (1), you dramatically
reduce the opponent's time to react, and (2), a position at the net increases your
range of possible shot angles. From there, you can even attempt a winner by
placing the ball only a few feet behind the net and close to the sideline (a shot
called a drop volley). The risk in approaching the net is to receive a passing shot

(or pass) from your opponent, that is, a shot that passes by the player at the net.
Therefore, you should initiate the net attack with an aggressive shot close to the
baseline to make it hard for the opponent to set up a passing shot. You then
immediately move to the net, following the direction of your last shot. This
ensures that you get good coverage for the possible returns your opponent might
attempt. The T-rule is useless at the net, and it wouldn't apply anyway, since the
opponent is forced to risk a passing shot. Contrary to groundstrokes, it is most of
the time better to hit volleys down the sideline and as short as possible (and not
