deep crosscourt). While this may not be very obvious from the perspective of a
player on the court, viewing the court from above and using geometry reveals
the power of this strategy. In figure 5.14, we show three different options to hit
the volley from a position close to the net and in the middle of a service box. The
opponent has to hit the ball with sufficient speed to pass the player at the net.
Very steep angles are almost impossible to hit with high speed, since the
playable court “becomes too short” in these directions. This reduces the possible
directions for reasonable shots.
Figure 5.14.
In the diagram on the left in figure 5.14, the volley is placed deep down the
line. Although the angle of possible returns is not very large, the player at the net
has to be very quick to cover the distance the range of possible returns demands.
We have indicated this distance by arrows. The diagram on the right shows the
situation after a volley that has been hit crosscourt and close to the baseline.
Here the position of the net player is even worse, since it is almost impossible to
run to the left sideline fast enough to cover the required distance. The opponent
will happily embrace this invitation for a passing shot down the line. The best
choice is to place the volley short down the line, as shown in the diagram in the
middle. The opponent has to run a long distance to get to the ball and will have
to hit it close the ground and near the net. It will be hard to lift the ball over the

net with sufficiently high speed, and even then the player on the net has a very
good coverage of all possible angles.
It must be said that you need a huge amount of practice to make the right
decisions during a rally on the tennis court and finally have the best shot
selection “computed in your brain,” but all guiding principles for successful
patterns of play are actually nothing more than applying geometric concepts.
Understanding tennis geometry will give you a significant advantage over your
opponents and enable you to beat them even if they hit harder or run faster than
you.
PLAYING BILLIARDS CLEVERLY
Those who play the game of billiards, and play it well, have a natural talent for
knowing how to hit a ball against the cushion so that it bounces off and lands at a
predetermined spot. However, using mathematics, we can find that desired point
rather simply. But before we employ a mathematical strategy that will justify the
technique, let's discuss the physical aspects involved.
Figure 5.15.
Imagine that you have the cue ball located somewhere on the table as shown
in figure 5.15. Your objective is to hit the cue ball against the side cushion and
have it ricochet so that it would hit the target ball, also shown in figure 5.15. The
technique is very simple. All we need to do is to place a mirror against the side
cushion and aim the cue ball at the mirror, shooting it to the point at which the

target ball is seen in the mirror. Of course, once you have marked that point,
remove the mirror (so that you don't break it) and aim the ball to that point.
The explanation that justifies this technique uses a concept from geometric
transformations. In this case, the transformation is a reflection. To reflect a given
point in the given line, we simply locate the new point along the perpendicular to
the given line from the given point and at an equal distance from the line (but on
the other side of the line), as shown in figure 5.16.
Figure 5.16.
We will now reflect the target ball in the side cushion, which is geometrically
equivalent to seeing the reflection of the target ball in the mirror that was placed
against the side cushion. We then aim the ball at the mirror-reflection of the
target ball with the straight-line segment shown in figure 5.17. The ball will then
ricochet off the cushion at the point P and hit the target ball as desired.

Figure 5.17.
We can easily show that this is the shortest distance from the cue ball to the
cushion to the target ball. This can be done by choosing any other point Q on the
cushion, and comparing the distance traveled from the cue ball's starting point to
the point Q and then to the target ball with the distance of the ball's previous path
through point P. (See fig. 5.18.) The path from point C to P to T, or, as stated
geometrically, CP + PT is equal to CP + PR, since triangle TPR is isosceles.
Similarly, CQ + QT = CQ + QR. However, we know that the shortest distance
between two points is a straight line, therefore, CP + PR < CQ + QR. Or, stated
verbally, CP + PR is shorter than any other path from the cue ball to the cushion
to the target ball.

Figure 5.18.
For those who wish to take the billiard example one step further, namely, by
hitting two cushions before hitting the target ball, we would need to reflect the
target ball in the two cushions and then follow that path, as shown with dashed
lines in figure 5.19. That is, first reflect the target ball in one cushion, then
reflect this reflection of the target ball in the extension of the other cushion, and
then determine the points A and B noted in figure 5.19.
Figure 5.19.
The same effect can be obtained by reflecting each of the two balls in their

respective cushions and then joining the two reflections to determine the points
A and B, which are the points of contact on the cushions—as shown in figure
5.20.
Figure 5.20.
Although the geometric procedure we are using may not be practical to use
during the billiard game, it does justify how using one or two mirrors can
determine the points of reflection, which are the points that the cue ball would
need to hit in order to reach the desired target ball.
MATHEMATICS ON A BICYCLE
With the increased proliferation of bicycles in our society today—especially in
big cities—it would be good to see how mathematics can make us better
understand the gear selection. Many bicycles have multiple gears and, therefore,
also many gear ratios. A shifting mechanism allows us to select an appropriate
gear ratio for efficiency or comfort under the prevailing circumstances. The
bicycles that we shall consider have two wheels of equal diameters and
derailleur gears with one, two, or three sprocket wheels (wheels with teeth or
cogs that mesh with the bike's chain) in the front and a sprocket wheel cluster on

the rear wheel. The latter typically consists of five or more sprocket wheels,
depending on the type of the bicycle. On the rear wheel, the largest sprocket
wheel is closest to the spokes, with the rest gradually getting smaller. (See fig.
