5.21.)
Figure 5.21. Derailleur Bicycle Drivetrain. (Image from Wikimedia Creative Commons, author:
Keithonearth; licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.)
The sprocket wheels in the front are also called chainrings. They are attached
to the cranks to which the pedals attach. The gearing (that is, the connection of
sprocket wheels by a chain) is obtained by moving the chain from one sprocket
to the other by means of a derailleur, a device that lifts the driving chain from
one sprocket wheel to another of a different size.
Modern racing bikes often have 10-speed or 11-speed cassettes (sprocket
clusters) and 2 chainrings in the front. Thus, there are up to 22 different gears
possible. Mountain bikes, on the other hand, usually have even three chainrings
in the front and, accordingly, up to 33 different gears. This is just a theoretical
maximum, since some gears would result in a very diagonal chain alignment and
should not be used, as they would cause excessive chain wear. Bicycles for off-
road cycling need very low gears for steep grades with poor traction. That's why
mountain bikes have a third, particularly small, chainring in the front.
Let's now examine closely the basic setup. There exists a front and rear
sprocket wheel with teeth set in gear by a connecting chain. The numbers of
teeth on the front and rear sprocket wheels are important. Suppose the front
sprocket wheel has 40 teeth and the rear sprocket wheel has 20 teeth; the ratio
would then be 
 or 2. This means that the rear sprocket wheel turns twice every
time the front sprocket wheel turns once. But the rear sprocket wheel is attached
to the bicycle wheel, and so the bicycle wheels will turn twice as well, when the
pedal makes one revolution. The distance traveled during one complete

revolution of the pedals also depends on the diameter of the drive wheel. Thus,
including the bicycle wheel in our consideration, the relevant quantity is the gear
ratio, measured in gear inches. It is defined as the product of the diameter of the
drive wheel in inches and the ratio between the number of teeth in the front
chainring and the number of teeth in rear sprocket. The result is usually rounded
to the nearest whole number:
Assuming that the diameter of the wheel (including the tire) is 27 inches, we
would have 2 · 27″ = 54 gear inches for a 40-tooth chainring and a 20-tooth
sprocket. The number generated here can range from 20 (very low gear) to 125
(very high gear), which provides a comparison between gears, which bicycle
experts and racers use to fine-tune the gearing to better suit their level of fitness,
their muscle strength, and the expected use. If you multiply the gear inches
obtained in the formula above by π ≈ 3.14, you get the distance traveled forward
with each turn of the pedals, called “meters of development.” (Recall:
circumference = π · diameter.) A higher gear is harder to pedal than a lower gear,
since the distance traveled during one revolution of the pedals is longer, and,
therefore, the work performed by the rider with each turn of the pedals must be
greater.
For example, a rider using a front-sprocket wheel with 46 teeth and a 16-tooth
wheel in the rear along with a 27″ wheel gets a gear ratio of 77.625 ≈ 78.
Another rider using a 50-tooth front-sprocket wheel and 16-tooth sprocket wheel
in the rear gets a gear ratio of 84.375 ≈ 84, which would be harder to pedal than
a 78-gear ratio. The rider with the 78-gear ratio goes approximately 245 inches
(or 6.2 meters) forward for each turn of the pedals; the rider with the 84-gear
ratio goes approximately 264 inches (or 6.7 meters) forward for each complete
turn of the pedals. Hence, the increased difficulty in pedaling is returned in
greater distance per pedal revolution.
Now let us examine applications of various gearing ratios to the average rider.
Suppose Charlie was riding comfortably on level ground in a 78-gear ratio, and
then he came to a rather-steep hill. Should he switch to a higher or lower gear
ratio? Your reasoning should be as follows: If Charlie switches to an 84-gear
ratio, he will go 264 inches forward for each turn of the pedals. This requires a
certain amount of work. To overcome the effects of gravity to get up the hill
requires additional energy. So, Charlie would probably end up walking his
bicycle. If Charlie had switched to a lower gear, he would use less energy to turn

the pedals, and the additional energy required to climb the hill would make his
gearing feel about the same as the 78-gear ratio. So, the answer is to switch to a
lower-number gear ratio. Charlie will have to turn the pedal more revolutions to
scale the hill—more than if he had chosen the 84-gear ratio, and more than if he
stayed in the 78-gear ratio. Remember, his gearing only feels like 78 because of
the hill.
The work performed while riding a bicycle from A to B is independent of the
chosen gear, but a rider can adapt the gear to the slope of the road and to her or
his physical condition. The trade-off for reducing the pedaling force by
switching to a lower gear is a higher number of pedal revolutions that are
necessary to get from point A to point B. However, the force exerted on the
pedals and the total number of revolutions are not the only relevant criteria. A
cyclist's legs produce power optimally within a narrow pedaling speed range, or
cadence. The cadence is the number of pedal revolutions per minute (rpm). For a
bicycle to travel at the same speed (or in the same time from A to B), using a
lower gear requires the rider to pedal at a faster cadence, but with less force.
Conversely, a higher gear provides a higher speed for a given cadence, but it
requires the rider to exert greater force. For professional cyclists, choosing the
right gear is essentially a matter of finding the optimal balance between the
cadence and the pedaling force. In a bicycle race, for instance, a stage of the
Tour de France, the cyclists will mostly choose the gear such that the cadence
always remains in their preferred range. The preferred cadence varies
individually and is somewhere between 70 and 110 rpm for most cyclists. Table
5.1 shows the bicycle's speed for different gears and cadences.
Table 5.1.
Of course, there are circumstances in which the preferred cadence corridor
must be temporarily left. This is typically the case in the final sprint of a race. To
reach maximum speed, a cyclist will always select the highest gear and pedal as
fast as possible. On the other hand, when riding up a very steep hill—for

example, the notorious Alpe d'Huez climb on a mountain stage of the Tour de
France—the cadence might fall substantially below 70 rpm, even if the cyclist
already uses the lowest gear, but the slope of the road is too high to maintain the
preferred cadence.
A racer will carefully select his or her back sprocket-wheel cluster depending
on the course. A relatively flat course would necessitate a tooth range of 11 to 23
in the rear sprocket-wheel cluster; in comparison, a mountain course would
require lower gears to climb up the hill and thus, for instance, a tooth range of 11
