to 32 (the 11-tooth sprocket is kept for potential sprint finishes). Finally,
preventing possible gear-ratio duplication will also affect the choice. In table 5.1,
we saw duplication of the same gear ratio with a 14- and 19-tooth rear sprocket
wheel (and chainrings with 53 and 39 teeth). This reduces the number of
different gears and should be avoided. Duplicated or near-duplicated gear ratios
occur on many less-expensive bicycles. Another aspect to be taken into
consideration is the increments in gear inches from one gear to the next. The
relative change from a lower gear to a higher gear can be expressed as a
percentage. Cycling tends to feel more comfortable if nearly all gear changes
have more or less the same percentage difference. For example, a change from a
13-tooth sprocket to a 15-tooth sprocket (15.4 percent) feels very similar to a
change from a 20-tooth sprocket to a 23-tooth sprocket (15 percent), even
though the latter has a larger absolute difference. Consistent percentage
differences can be achieved if the number of teeth progress geometrically. So,
you can now see how mathematics plays a significant role in optimizing our
bicycle ride.
THE SPIROGRAPH TOY
The Spirograph toy is a drawing tool developed by the British engineer Denys
Fisher (1918–2002). It was very popular in the late 1960s and early 1970s and is
now, nearly half a century later, experiencing a revival. It won the Educational
Toy of the Year Award three times in a row, from 1965 to 1967, and it was a Toy
of the Year finalist again in 2014.3 A Spirograph set basically consists of plastic
rings and wheels of different sizes and, occasionally, a plastic circle template.
Both the wheels as well as the rings, or the circles, in the template have gear
teeth on their edges fitting together such that the wheels can roll without
slippage along the circumference of other circles—outside other wheels or inside
the rings or circles in the template. Each wheel or ring has several holes
provided for a ballpoint pen. (See fig. 5.22.)

Figure 5.22. A version of the Spirograph toy.
Pins can be used to secure a stationary ring or wheel on an underlying piece of
paper or cardboard. Another wheel is now placed such that its teeth engage with
those of the pinned piece. By inserting a pen or pencil point through a hole in the
movable wheel and pushing it around with its gear inside the gear of the
stationary circle, you will enable the pen to draw a curve on the underlay. After a
finite number of orbits of the movable wheel, the pen returns to its starting
position on the underlay, and you will thus obtain a closed curve. By combining
wheels and rings of different diameters and inserting the pen in holes of variable
distance from the center of the wheels, you will create fantastic geometric shapes
of unexpected intricacy and beauty, as can be seen in figure 5.23.
Figure 5.23. Some examples of curves produced with a Spirograph toy.
The curves traced out by the Spirograph toy are called epitrochoids if the
rolling circle is outside the stationary circle; and they are called hypotrochoids if
the rolling circle is inside the stationary circle. The drawn curves are special
types of roulettes; roulettes are a family of curves that are generated by letting a
curve roll without slipping on another stationary curve, and following a point
that is attached to it, but not necessarily on the rolling curve. For instance, if we

push a movable wheel inside or outside around a stationary one as we show it in
figure 5.24, then the rolling curve is a circle of radius r and the stationary curve
is a circle of radius R (if we ignore the gear teeth that are necessary to prevent
slippage). Each hole in the rolling wheel represents a point whose position is
fixed with respect to any point on the rolling circle. The terms epitrochoid and
hypotrochoid are derived from the Greek word for “wheel,” τροχός (trochos),
with the prefix epi (Greek: ἐπί) meaning “over” or “upon,” and the prefix hypo
(Greek: ὑπο) standing for “under.” The curve that is being drawn in figure 5.24
on the left is an epitrochoid; the one on the right is a hypotrochoid.
Figure 5.24. Examples of an epitrochoid (left side) and hypotrochoid (right side), drawn with a
Spirograph set.
The shape of the curve depends on the radii r and R of the two circles and on
the distance d between the pen or pencil point and the center of the rotating
wheel. Ignoring the absolute size of the curve, its shape (up to scaling) is
actually determined by the ratios R:r and r:d. With a Spirograph set, varying
these ratios by using different combinations of rings, wheels, and holes therein,
is simple and will lead to an astonishingly diverse family of curves that can be
drawn. The complexity of the examples shown in figure 5.23 seems to indicate
that a mathematical description of these curves must be quite complicated.
However, using analytic geometry together with some basic trigonometry, you
can actually derive formulas representing these curves, no matter how
intertwined and complex they might appear.
In figure 5.25 we show how an epitrochoid emerges by rolling a circle of
radius r without slipping on the circumference of a circle of radius R. The hole
through which you insert the pen or pencil is represented by the point labeled P,
at a distance d from the center C of the moving circle, which we will refer to as
the “wheel.”

Figure 5.25. Finding the angle-dependent coordinates of a pen or pencil creating an epitrochoid.
Note that P has a fixed position on the wheel, which we indicated by a rod
connecting P and C. If you let the wheel roll without slipping counterclockwise
around the stationary circle, point P will trace the dashed trajectory. To calculate
the path of P, you have to introduce a coordinate system. It is convenient to
choose the location of the center of the stationary circle as the origin of the
coordinate system. Without loss of generality, you may assume that the point of
contact between both circles is initially located on the x-axis. As you roll the
wheel around the stationary circle, the angle α of the center of the wheel
increases and the point P traces an epitrochoid. To describe the path of P
mathematically, you only have to find out how its x- and y-coordinates change
with α. Figure 5.25 shows the position of the wheel at different instances in time.
Point A is the point of contact between the two circles. Point B represents the
point on the wheel that is initially in contact with the stationary circle and thus
initially congruent with A. The primed labels refer to the positions of the
respective points at a later time, when the wheel has reached an angle α. Let x(α)
and y(α) represent the coordinates of P in dependence on the angle α. Clearly,
the initial position of P is given by x(0) = R + r – d and y(0) = 0. Taking a look
at the right triangles OC′Q1 and C′P′Q2, where Q1 and Q2 are auxiliary points, it
easy to see that x(α) = OQ1 + C′Q2 and y(α) = C′Q1 + P′Q2.
Now we have to invoke a little bit of trigonometry! Firstly, we notice that OQ1
= (R + r)· cos α and C′Q1 = (R + r)· sin α. Determining the lengths of the sides
of triangle C′P′Q2 is a little harder. At least we can say that C′Q2 = d · cosβ and

