P′Q2 = d · sinβ, where β is the angle ∠P′C′Q2 (see fig. 5.25). Therefore, the task
is to calculate β. Thoroughly inspecting the various angles formed around C′, we
observe that β = ∠B′C′A′ – ∠Q2C′A′, where ∠Q2C′A′ = 180º – α. Thus, it only
remains to find a relation between α and ∠B′C′A′. The key to solving this
problem is to recognize that the length of the circular arc AA′ must be exactly
equal to the length of the circular arc A′B′, because the wheel rolls without
slipping. Since α is the central angle of the arc AA′ and ∠B′C′A′ is the central
angle of the arc A′B′, we must have R · α = r · ∠B′C′A′, implying 
Therefore, we obtain 
 Recalling our expressions for x(α)
and y(α), we are actually interested in the cosine and sine of β. Employing the
identities cos (β ±180°) = – cos (β) and sin (β ±180°) = –sin (β), we finally arrive
at:
These formulas enable us to compute the coordinates x(α) and y(α) for any
value of α, thereby obtaining a point of the corresponding epitrochoid. For
hypotrochoids, where the wheel is rolling inside the stationary circle, an
analogous line of arguments leads to the following:
Having revealed the mathematics behind the Spirograph toy, we may now
investigate the generated curves more systematically. In figures 5.26, 5.27, 5.28,
and 5.29, we show series of epitrochoids with fixed values for d and r, but
different values for R. This means that in each of the series we always use the
same wheel and the same pen hole, but we let the wheel orbit around stationary
circles of different sizes. In figures 5.26, 5.27, and 5.28, the stationary circle is
larger than the moving wheel (R > r); in figure 5.29, it is smaller (R < r).

Figure 5.26. Epitrochoids for 
 and 
 where k is an integer between 1 and 10.
Figure 5.27. Epitrochoids for 
 and 
, where k is an integer between 1 and 10.
Figure 5.28. Epitrochoids for 
 and 
 where k is an integer between 1 and 10.
The only difference between figures 5.26, 5.27, and 5.28 is the value of
parameter d, that is, the distance of the pen or pencil from the center of the
rolling wheel. As the ratio d:r increases, the curve bends more sharply in the

points closest to its center of symmetry. In figure 5.28, the ratio d:r is almost 1,
indicating that the pen or pencil is very close the rim of the rolling wheel.
Figure 5.29. Epitrochoids for 
 and the following values for 
To complete the picture, we will look at some hypotrochoids as well. Recall
that here the wheel is now rolling inside a stationary ring, which must therefore
have a larger diameter than the moving wheel (see the picture on the right in
figure 5.24).
Figure 5.30. Hypotrochoids for 
 and 
, where k is an integer between 1 and 10.

Figure 5.31. Hypotrochoids for 
 and 
 where k is an integer between 1 and 10.
In figure 5.31, the pen or pencil is closer to the rim of the orbiting wheel than
in figure 5.30. Again, we observe that the curves in figure 5.31 change their
direction more sharply than those in figure 5.30. What will happen if d = r? Of
course, we cannot insert the pen or pencil through a hole that is exactly on the
rim of the wheel, but there is no difficulty in performing this experiment on a
computer. In figure 5.32 we show the resulting curves. They have sharp, thorn-
like cusps, since the pen or pencil changes its direction by 180 degrees whenever
it touches the stationary circle. The curves in figure 5.32 are special variants of
hypotrochoids called hypocycloids. Analogously, an epitrochoid would become
an epicycloid, if d = r.
Hypocycloids and epicycloids are derived from cycloids, which are curves
traced by a point on the circumference of a circle as the circle rolls along a
straight line (without slippage). If we increase the radius R of the stationary
circle (without changing r), the ratio r:R gets smaller, and as this ratio gets closer
and closer to zero, our hypocycloids and epicycloids would approach cycloids.
Locally, the circumference of the stationary circle will more and more look like a
straight line as R gets larger and larger; we experience this ourselves simply by
standing on the surface of the earth, when we cannot observe the curve from a
local perspective.

Figure 5.32. Hypotrochoids for d = r and 
, where k is an integer between 1 and 10.
An interesting question concerning the Spirograph toy is the following: How
many times must the rolling wheel orbit around the stationary circle until the pen
meets its starting point again? In other words, how many orbits do we have to
draw in order to see the complete curve? The answer to this question lies in the
ratio  which is essentially the ratio between the numbers of gear teeth on the
circumferences of the two circles. Assume that we use a stationary wheel with
150 gear teeth and a rolling wheel with 35 gear teeth revolving outside (or
inside) the larger wheel. We mark the one gear tooth of the rolling circle initially
in contact with the stationary wheel. After one orbit of the rolling wheel, the
mark will be off its initial position by a number of gear teeth equal to the
remainder of the division 
 that is, by 10 teeth (150 = 4 · 35 + 10). After two
orbits, the mark will be off its initial position by 20 gear teeth of the rolling
wheel. After three orbits, the difference will be 30 gear teeth; but after four
orbits, it will only be 5 gear teeth, since the remainder of 
 is 5. After how
many orbits N will the mark meet its starting point again? This will be as soon as
the remainder of 
 is equal to zero, which means that 35 is a divisor of N · 150.
The least common multiple (LCM) of 150 and 35 gives the number of gear-teeth
contacts necessary to complete our epitrochoid (or hypotrochoid). In our case,
this would be 1050, since 1050 = LCM(150,35). Now we only have to figure out
the corresponding number of orbits. Since the larger wheel has 150 gear teeth,
we just need to divide the obtained number of gear teeth contacts by 150 to get
the number of orbits after which the pen or pencil point will return to its initial
