position. Hence, we need 
 orbits to complete our epitrochoid (or
hypotrochoid). Figure 5.33 shows epitrochoids and hypotrochoids for a ratio of
150:35 between the radius of stationary circle and the radius of the rolling circle.
More generally, using a smaller wheel with p gear teeth and a larger wheel or

ring with q gear teeth (q > p), the least common multiple of p and q divided by q
gives the number of orbits of the smaller wheel that are required to complete the
curve, that is, 
Figure 5.33. Epitrochoids (first row) and hypotrochoids (second row) for a ratio of 150:35.
The diversity of shapes that can be produced with a Spirograph toy is
astonishing. The surprising complexity and profound elegance that can emerge
from the geometry of these curves has not only fascinated children and adults
playing with a Spirograph, but also inspired engineers, architects, and artists. For
younger readers, we highly recommend you get involved in a hands-on
experience and use a Spirograph toy to create your own Spirograph designs. The
advanced reader may try to construct epitrochoids and hypotrochoids on the
computer by means of their governing equations, using geometry software such
as the Geometer's Sketchpad or GeoGebra. For the less ambitious, there are also
various free and ready-to-use Spirograph drawing programs available on the
Internet.
Now that we have considered the mathematics around the man-made world,
which largely involves recreation, we will now embark on a mathematical
journey through the natural world, which we cannot control, but we ought to be
able to understand better from a mathematical point of view. Hence, we continue
our journey by looking at the earth from a distance and from the surface.

The applications of mathematics as related to the world we live in are essentially
boundless. In this chapter, we will show how mathematics can be used to
measure, navigate, and map out the earth, and to appreciate mathematically what
the earth demonstrates to us in nature. We begin with a review of the ancient
method of measuring the size of the earth.
MEASURES OF AND ON THE EARTH
Have you ever stood at the beach and wondered how far you can see to the
horizon line, that is, the separation between the sky and the water? Of course,
this depends to some degree—although be it minimally—on the height of the
observer. With simple geometry, we can calculate that distance. However, before
we determine the distance to the horizon line, let's see how you could possibly
measure the size of the earth, which for our purposes here, we will consider to be
a perfect sphere, even though we know that there is a slight difference in the
diameter measured between the North Pole and South Pole (7,898 miles) and the
equatorial diameter (7,926 miles), for an average diameter of 7,912 miles. Using
the formula for the circumference of a circle, πd, we find an average
circumference of 24,856 miles.
With modern instrumentation, measuring the earth is not terribly difficult, but
this was no mean feat thousands of years ago. Remember, the word geometry is
derived from “earth measurement.” Therefore, it is appropriate to consider this
issue in one of its earliest forms. One of these measurements of the
circumference of the earth was made by the Greek mathematician Eratosthenes
(276 BCE–194 BCE) in about 230 BCE. His measurement was remarkably
accurate—less than 1 percent in error!1 To make this measurement, Eratosthenes
used the relationship of alternate-interior angles of parallel lines, to which we

were introduced in high-school geometry.
As librarian of Alexandria, Eratosthenes had access to records of calendar
events. He discovered that at noon on a certain day of the year in the town of
Syene (now called Aswan) on the Nile River, the sun was directly overhead. As
a result, the bottom of a deep well was entirely lit and a vertical pole, parallel to
the rays hitting it, cast practically no shadow.
At the same time, however, a vertical pole in the city of Alexandria did cast a
shadow. When that day arrived again, Eratosthenes measured the angle (which is
shown as ∠1 in figure 6.1) formed by such a pole and the ray of light from the
sun going past the top of the pole to the far end of the shadow. He found it to be
about 7°12ʹ, or  of 360°.
Figure 6.1.
Assuming the rays of the sun to be parallel, he knew that the angle at the
center of the earth must be congruent to ∠1, and, hence, must also measure
approximately  of 360°. Since Syene and Alexandria were almost on the same
meridian or longitudinal line, Syene must be located on the radius of the circle,
which was parallel to the rays of the sun. Eratosthenes thus deduced that the
distance between Syene and Alexandria was  of the circumference of the earth.
The distance from Syene to Alexandria was believed to be about 5,000 Greek
stadia. A stadium was a unit of measurement equal to the length of an Olympic
or Egyptian stadium. Therefore, Eratosthenes concluded that the circumference
of the earth was about 250,000 Greek stadia, or about 24,660 miles. This is very
close to modern calculations, which have determined the circumference to be
24,856 miles. So how's that for some real geometry!
Let's consider our original problem, that of determining the distance to the
horizon. Once again, we will work with the assumption that the earth is a perfect
sphere. Imagine that we are standing on a beach on a perfectly clear day,
ignoring any light refraction that may occur while passing through the
atmosphere, and our eyes are at a height of h above the sea level, and the
distance to the horizon will be designated by d, with r representing the radius of

the earth.
Figure 6.2.
Applying the Pythagorean theorem to the right triangle shown in figure 6.2,
we get the following: (r + h)2 = d2 + r2. Compared to the radius of the earth, our
height above sea level is negligible, so that we can safely ignore h2, without too
much loss of accuracy, when we square the binomial above to get (r + h)2 = r2 +
h2 + 2rh ≈ r2 + 2rh. By then substituting this value for the binomial, we get r2 +
2rh = d2 + r¡2, which then simplifies to d=√2rh. Let's assume that our eyes are 6
feet above the ground, which would give us h = 6 feet or 
 miles. Therefore,
with the earth's average radius of 3,956 miles, we get 
 miles
for the distance from us, the viewers, to the horizon. Naturally, if we were
standing on a higher platform, such as a lifeguard's seat, the distance we can see
to the horizon will be considerably longer. For example, if you were to look at
the horizon from the magnificent ledge where three United States presidents
