vacationed (Ulysses S. Grant, Chester A. Arthur, and Theodore Roosevelt) in the
village of Haines Falls in the Catskill Mountains of New York State, where the
famous Catskill Mountain House once stood at an elevation of 2,250 feet,
according to our formula you should be able to see the horizon line at a distance
of about 58 miles. To consider an extreme, suppose you were at the top of Mount
Everest, at an elevation of 29,029 feet. From there, the distance to the horizon
would be approximately 208 miles. You now have a method of determining
whether the lyrics by Alan Jay Lerner were correct in his musical On a Clear
Day You Can See Forever. So we can conclude that he was exaggerating a bit!

NAVIGATING THE GLOBE
There are entertainments in mathematics that stretch the mind (gently, of course)
in a very pleasant and satisfying way. As we navigate the earth, we will begin
with a popular puzzle question that has some very interesting extensions, and
that will help us as we traverse the globe. Here we will be required to do some
“out of the box” thinking, with the hope that we will leave you with some
favorable impressions. Let's consider the following question: Where on Earth
can you be so that you can walk 1 mile south, then 1 mile east, and then 1 mile
north and end up at the starting point?
Perhaps after a few attempted starting points, you may come up with the right
answer: the North Pole, of course! To test this answer, start from the North Pole
(shown in fig. 6.3), and then travel south 1 mile, and then go east 1 mile, which
takes you along a latitudinal line—one that remains equidistant from the North
Pole, at a distance of 1 mile from the pole. Then, travel 1 mile north, and you
will get back to where you began, the North Pole.
Figure 6.3.
Most people familiar with this problem feel a sense of completion. Yet we can
ask, Are there other such starting points where we can take the same three
directional “walks” and end up back at the starting point? The answer, surprising
enough, is yes. One set of starting points is found by locating the latitudinal
circle, which has a circumference of 1 mile, and is nearest the South Pole. (See
fig. 6.4.) From this circle, walk 1 mile north (along a great circle, naturally), and
form another latitudinal circle. Any point along this second latitudinal circle will

qualify. Let's try it.
Begin on this second latitudinal circle (1 mile farther north). Walk 1 mile
south, which takes you to the first latitudinal circle. Then walk 1 mile east,
which takes you exactly once around the circle, and then 1 mile north, which
takes you back to the starting point.
Figure 6.4.
Suppose the latitudinal circle closer to the South Pole, the one along which we
would walk, would have a circumference of half a mile. We could still satisfy the
given instructions, yet this time we would have to walk around the circle twice,
and get back to our starting point on a latitudinal circle that is 1 mile farther
north. If the latitudinal circle nearer to the South Pole had a circumference of a
quarter of a mile, then we would merely have to walk around this circle four
times to get back to the starting point of this circle and then go north 1 mile to
the original starting point.
At this point, we can take a giant leap to a generalization that will lead us to
many more points that satisfy the original stipulations. Actually, an infinite
number of points! This set of points can be located by beginning with the
latitudinal circle, located nearest the South Pole, that has a circumference of 
of a mile, so that a mile-long walk east will take you back to the point on the
circle at which you began your walk on this latitudinal circle (since a mile-long
walk on this circle entails walking around this circle n times). The rest is the
same as before, that is, walking 1 mile south and then later 1 mile north. Is this
possible with latitude circle routes near the North Pole? Yes, of course! As you
can see, mathematics can be quite helpful when navigating the globe.

WHAT IS RELATIVITY?
The concept of relativity is generally not well understood by most non-scientists.
Although it is often associated with Albert Einstein, it has many applications. It
may be a difficult concept to grasp for some, so we shall exercise patience and
support as we gently navigate further. Consider the following problem:
The problem: While rowing his boat upstream, David drops a cork
overboard and continues rowing for 10 more minutes. He then turns
around, chasing the cork, and retrieves it when the cork has traveled 1
mile downstream. What is the rate of the stream?
Rather than approach this problem through the traditional methods that are
common in an algebra course, consider the following. The problem can be made
significantly easier by considering the notion of relativity.
It does not matter whether the stream is moving and carrying David
downstream, or whether it is still. We are concerned only with the separation and
coming together of David and the cork. If the stream were stationary, David
would require as much time rowing to the cork as he did rowing away from the
cork. That is, he would require 10 + 10 = 20 minutes. Since the cork travels 1
mile during these 20 minutes, the stream's rate of speed is 3 miles per hour (60
min. ÷ 20 min. = 3 and, of course, 1 mi. · 3 = 3 mi.).
Again, this may not be an easy concept to grasp for some and is best left to
ponder in quiet. It is a concept worth understanding, for it has many useful
applications in our thinking processes in everyday life. This is, after all, one of
the purposes for understanding mathematics.
COLORING A MAP
Have you ever wondered how a map is colored? Aside from deciding which
colors should be used, the question might come up regarding the number of
colors that are required for a specific map so that there will never be the same
color on both sides of a boarder. How many colors do you think are required?
Mathematicians have determined the answer to this question: You will never
need more than four different colors to color any map, regardless of how many
borders or contorted arrangements the map presents. For many years, the
question as to how many colors are required was a constant challenge to
mathematicians, especially those doing research in topology, which is a branch
of mathematics related to geometry, for which figures discussed may appear on

plane surfaces or on three-dimensional surfaces. The topologist studies the
properties of a figure that remain the same after the figure has been distorted or
stretched according to a set of rules. A piece of string with its ends connected
may take on the shape of a circle, or a square, which is all the same for the
topologist. In going through this transformation, the order of the “points” along
the string does not change. This retention of ordering has survived the distortion
