of shape, and it is this property that attracts the interest of topologists. Therefore,
a circle and the square represent the same geometric concept to the topologist.
Throughout the nineteenth century, it was believed that five colors were
required to color even the most complicated-looking map. However, there was
always strong speculation that four colors would suffice. It was not until 1976
that the mathematicians Kenneth Appel (1932–2013) and Wolfgang Haken
(1928–) proved that four colors were sufficient to color any map.2 However,
unconventionally, they used a high-powered computer to consider all possible
map arrangements. It must be said that there are still mathematicians who are
dissatisfied with their “proof,” since it was done by computer and not in the
traditional way, “by hand.” Previously, it was considered one of the famous
unsolved problems of mathematics. Let us now delve into the consideration of
various maps and the number of colors required to color them in such a way that
no common boundary of two regions shares the same color on both of its sides.
Suppose we consider a geographic map that has a configuration analogous to
that shown in figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5.
Here we notice that there are eight different regions indicated by the letters
shown. Suppose we list all regions that have a common boundary with region H,
and regions that share a common vertex with region H. The regions designated
by the letters B, G, and F share a border with region H. The region designated by

the letter C shares a vertex with the region designated by the letter H.
Remember, a map will be considered correctly colored when each region is
completely colored and two regions that share a common boundary have
different colors. Two regions sharing a common vertex may share the same
color. Let's consider coloring a few maps (see fig. 6.6) to see various potential
map configurations that require no more than three colors. (note: b indicates
blue; r indicates red; y indicates yellow; and g indicates green).
Figure 6.6.
The first map in figure 6.6 is able to be colored in two colors: yellow and red.
The second map required three colors: yellow, red, and green. The third map has
three separate regions but requires only two colors, red and green, since the
innermost territory does not share a common border with the outermost territory.
It would seem reasonable to conclude that if a three-region map can be colored
with fewer than three colors, a four-region map can be colored with fewer than
four colors. Let's consider such a map.
Figure 6.7.
The left-side map shown in figure 6.7 has four regions and requires only two
colors for correct coloring, whereas the right-side map also consists of four
regions but requires three colors for correct coloring.
We should now consider a map that requires four colors for proper coloring of
the regions. Essentially, this will be a map in which each of the four regions
shares a common border with the other three regions. One possible such

mapping is shown in figure 6.8.
Figure 6.8.
If we now take the next logical step in this series of map-coloring challenges,
we should come up with the idea of coloring maps involving five distinct
regions. It will be possible to draw maps that have five regions and require two,
three, or four colors to be colored correctly. The task of drawing a five-region
map that requires five colors for correct coloring will be impossible. This
curiosity can be generalized through further investigation and should convince
you of the idea that any map on a plane surface, with any number of regions, can
be successfully colored with four or fewer colors. You might want to challenge
friends to conceive of a map of any number of regions that requires more than
four colors so that no two regions with a common border share the same color.
This puzzle has remained alive for many years, challenging some of the most
brilliant minds; but, as we said earlier, the issue has been closed by the work of
the two mathematicians Appel and Haken. There are still many conjectures in
mathematics that have escaped proof but have never been disproven. Here, at
least, we have a conjecture that is closed.
CROSSING BRIDGES
New York City is comprised mostly of islands—as a matter of fact, the only part
of the city that is part of the mainland of the United States is the Bronx,
excluding City Island, of course. Consequently, the city is blessed with many
bridges. There are bike and track races that traverse several bridges throughout
their paths. Most of us take bridge crossing for granted these days. Bridges
essentially become part of the path traveled and escape our attention until there

is a toll to be paid. Then you take particular note of the bridge crossing, of
course.
In the eighteenth century and earlier, when walking was the dominant form of
local transportation, people would often count particular kinds of objects they
passed. One such was bridges. Through the eighteenth century, the small
Prussian city of Königsberg (today called Kaliningrad, Russia), located where
the Pregel River forms two branches around an island portion of the city,
provided a recreational dilemma: Could a person walk over each of the seven
bridges exactly once in a continuous walk through the city? The residents of the
city had this as an entertaining activity, particularly on Sunday afternoons. Since
there were no successful attempts, the challenge continued for many years.
This problem provides a wonderful window into networks, which is referred
to as graph theory, an extended field of geometry that gives us a renewed view
of the subject. To begin, we should present the problem. In figure 6.9, we can see
a map of the city with the seven bridges.
Figure 6.9.
In figure 6.10, we will indicate the island by Ⓐ, the left bank of the river by
Ⓑ, the right bank by Ⓒ, and the area between the two arms of the upper course
by Ⓓ. The seven bridges are called Holz, Schmiede, Honig, Hohe, Köttel,
Grüne, and Krämer. If we start at Holz and walk to Schmiede and then through
Honig, through Hohe, through Köttel, and then through Grüne, we will never
cross Krämer. On the other hand, if we start at Krämer and walk to Honig,
through Hohe, through Köttel, through Schmiede, and then through Holz, we
will never travel through Grüne.

Figure 6.10.
In 1735, the famous mathematician Leonhard Euler (1707–1783) proved
mathematically that this walk could not be performed.3 The famous Königsberg
Bridges Problem, as it became known, is a lovely application of a topological
problem with networks. It is very nice to observe how mathematics used
