properly can put a practical problem to rest. Before we embark on the problem,
we ought to become familiar with the basic concept involved. Toward that end,
try to trace with a pencil each of the following configurations without missing
any part and without going over any part twice. Keep count of the number of
arcs or line segments, which have an endpoint at each of the points A, B, C, D,
and E.
Configurations such as the five figures, called networks, which are shown in
figure 6.11, are made up of line segments and/or continuous arcs. The degree of
the vertex is determined by the number of arcs or line segments that have an
endpoint at that particular vertex, and, as such, the degree of the vertex can be
odd or even.
Figure 6.11.

After trying to trace these networks without taking the pencil off the paper and
without going over any line more than once, you should notice two direct
outcomes. The networks can be traced (or traversed) if they have (1) all even-
degree vertices or (2) exactly two odd-degree vertices. The following two
statements summarizes this:
1. There is an even number of odd-degree vertices in a connected network.
2. A connected network can be traversed only if it has at most two odd-degree
vertices.
Network figure 6.11a has five vertices. Vertices B, C, and E are of even
degree, and vertices A and D are of odd degree. Since figure 6.11a has exactly
two odd-degree vertices as well as three even-degree vertices, it is traversable. If
we start at A then go down to D, across to E, back up to A, across to B, and down
to D, we have chosen a desired route.
Network figure 6.11b has five vertices. Vertex C is the only even-degree
vertex. Vertices A, B, E, and D are all of odd-degree. Consequently, since the
network has more than two odd-degree vertices, it is not traversable.
Network figure 6.11c is traversable because it has two even-degree vertices
and exactly two odd-degree vertices.
Network figure 6.11d has five even-degree vertices and, therefore, can be
traversed.
Network figure 6.11e has four odd-degree vertices and cannot be traversed.
The Königsberg Bridges Problem is the same problem as the one posed in
figure 6.11e. Let's take a look at figure 6.11e and figure 6.10 and note the
similarity. There are seven bridges in figure 6.10, and there are seven lines in
figure 6.11e. In figure 6.11e, each vertex is of odd-degree. In figure 6.10, if we
start at Ⓓ we have three choices, we could go to Hohe, Honig, or Holz. If in
figure 6.11e we start at D we have three line paths to choose from. In both
figures, if we are at C or Ⓒ, we have three bridges we could go on (or three
lines). A similar situation exists for locations Ⓐ and Ⓑ in figure 6.10 and
vertices A and B in figure 6.11e. We can see that this network cannot be
traversed.
By reducing the bridges and islands to a network problem, we can easily solve
it. This is a clever tactic to solve problems in mathematics. You might try to find
a group of local bridges to create a similar challenge and see if the walk is
traversable. This problem and its network application is an excellent introduction
into the field of topology, and, beyond that, we can also apply this technique of
the traversibility of a network to the famous “Five-Bedroom-House Problem.”

Let's consider the floor plan of a house with five rooms as shown in figure 6.12.
Figure 6.12.
Each room has a doorway to each adjacent room and at least one doorway
leading outside the house. The problem is to have a person start either inside or
outside the house and walk through each doorway exactly once. You will realize
that, although the number of attempts is finite, there are far too many potential
paths to make a trial-and-error solution practical.
Figure 6.13 shows various possible paths joining the five rooms A, B, C, D,
and E and the outside area F.

Figure 6.13.
As before, our question can be answered by merely determining whether this
network is traversible. In figure 6.13 we notice that we have four odd-degree
vertices, and two even-degree vertices. Since there are not exactly two or zero
vertices of odd order, this network cannot be traversed. Therefore, the Five-
Bedroom-House Problem does not have a solution path that would allow
walking through each doorway exactly once. As you can see, even in choosing
paths for travel, mathematics seems to provide a solution to our question.
MATHEMATICS IN NATURE
In this section, we will take you through a variety of unexpected occurrences of
mathematics showing itself in nature. Primarily the mathematics that applies
here is based on the famous Fibonacci numbers. These numbers (1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8,
13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, 233,…) originate from a problem about the regeneration
of rabbits posed by Leonardo of Pisa (known today as Fibonacci) in chapter 12
of his book titled Liber Abaci. These numbers continue indefinitely and are
generated by adding the last two numbers in the sequence to get the next one. In
other words, the number following 233 is found by adding 144 + 233 = 377.
These numbers seem to appear everywhere in nature, as you will see in the next
several examples. For more about the Fibonacci numbers, see The Fabulous
Fibonacci Numbers, by A. S. Posamentier and I. Lehmann.4
THE MALE BEE'S FAMILY TREE
Of the more than thirty thousand species of bees, the most well-known is
probably the honeybee, which lives in a bee hive and has a family. So, let us take
a closer look at this type of bee. Curiously enough, an inspection of the family
tree of the male bee will reveal our famous numbers. To examine the family tree
closely, we first must understand the peculiarities of the male bee. In a bee hive,
there are three types of bees: the male bees (called drones) who does no work,
the female bees (called worker bees) who do all the work, and the queen bee,
who produces eggs to generate more bees. Male bees hatch from an unfertilized
eggs, which means they have only a mother and no father (but do have a
grandfather), whereas female bees hatch from fertilized eggs, thus requiring a
mother (queen bee) and a father (one of the drones). The female bees end up as
worker bees, unless they have taken some of the “royal jelly” that enables them

to become a queen bee and begin a new colony of bees elsewhere.
In figure 6.14, where ♂ represents the male and ♀ represents the female, we
begin with the male bee whose ancestors we are tracking. As we said, the male
bee must come from an unfertilized egg, so only a female was necessary to
produce him; we see the male bee at the top and his mother in the second row. In
