We can find spiral patterns, especially 5-8, in Aroids. The aroids (family
Araceae) are a group of attractive ornamental plants that include the very
familiar Aglaonemas, Alocasias, Anthuriums, Arums, Caladiums, Colocasias,
Dieffenbachias, Monsteras, Philodendrons, Scindapsuses, and Spathiphyllums.5
Spirals are also found on a variety of other plants. Figures 6.20, 6.21, 6.22, 6.23,
and 6.24 are a few representative examples. You may well want to search for
others.

Figure 6.20. Mammillaria Huitzilopochtli has 13 and 21 spirals.
Figure 6.21. Mammillaria Magnimamma has 8 and 13 spirals.
Figure 6.22. Marguerite has 21 and 34 spirals.

Figure 6.23. Sunflower has 34 and 55 spirals.
Figure 6.24. Sunflower has 55 and 89 spirals.
Based on a survey of the literature encompassing 650 species and 12,500
specimens, Roger V. Jean6 estimated that, among plants displaying spiral, or
multijugate phyllotaxis, about 92 percent of them have Fibonacci phyllotaxis.
You may wonder why this happens. Certainly, mathematicians did not
influence this phenomenon. The reason seems to be that this arrangement forms
an optimal packing of the seeds so that, no matter how large the seed range, if all
of the seeds being the same size, they should be uniformly packed at any stage
(this means that there is no crowding in the center and the seeds are not too
sparse near the edges). We “see” this packing as spirals, which almost always
translates into adjacent Fibonacci numbers.
LEAF ARRANGEMENT—PHYLLOTAXIS
Until now, we have concentrated on the center of the sunflower, or, for that
matter, the daisy; but we can now inspect the petals surrounding the center.

Again, you will discover that most plants will have a number of petals
corresponding to a Fibonacci number. For example, lilies and irises have 3
petals; buttercups have 5 petals; some delphiniums have 8; corn marigolds have
13 petals; some asters have 21 petals; and daisies can be found with 34, 55, or 89
petals—all Fibonacci numbers!
Here is a short list of some flowers arranged by the number of petals they
have:
3 petals: iris, snowdrop, lily (some lilies have 6 petals formed from two
sets of 3)
5 petals: buttercup, columbine (Aquilegia), wild rose, larkspur, pinks, apple
blossom, hibiscus
8 petals: delphiniums, Cosmos bipinnatus7, Coreopsis tinctoria
13 petals: corn marigold, cineraria, some daisies, ragwort
21 petals: aster, black-eyed Susan, chicory, Helianthus annuus
34 petals: plantain, pyrethrum, some daisies
55, 89 petals: Michaelmas daisies, the Asteraceae family
Some species, such as the buttercup, are very precise about the number of
petals they have, but other species have petals whose numbers are very near
those above, with the average being a Fibonacci number!
Having now inspected the parts of flowers, we can look at the placement of
the leaves on a stem. Take a plant that has not been pruned, and locate the lowest
leaf. Begin with the bottom leaf, and count the number of rotations around the
stem, each time going through the next leaf up the stem, until you reach the next
leaf whose direction is the same as the first leaf you identified (that is, above it
and pointing in the same direction). The number of rotations will be a Fibonacci
number. Furthermore, the number of leaves that you will pass along the way to
reach the “final” leaf will also be a Fibonacci number.
For example, in figure 6.25 it took 5 revolutions to reach the leaf (the 8th leaf)
that is in the same direction as the first one. This phyllotaxis (i.e., leaf
arrangement) will vary with different species but should be a Fibonacci number.
If we refer to the rotation/leaf-number ratio for this plant, it would be 5/8. The
curve marked in figure 6.25 is described as the “genetic spiral of a plant.”

Figure 6.25.
Here are some phyllotaxis ratios:
1/2: elm, linden, lime, some grasses
3/8: asters, cabbages, poplar, pear, hawkweed, some roses
1/3: alders, birches, sedges, beech, hazel, blackberry, some grasses
2/5: roses, oak, apricot, cherry, apple, holly, plum, common groundsel
8/21: fir trees, spruce
5/13: pussy willow, almond
13/34: some pine trees
Different species of palms display different numbers of leaf spirals, but the
numbers always match with Fibonacci numbers. For example, in the areca nut
palm (Areca catechu), or the ornamental Ptychosperma macarthurii palm, only a
single foliar spiral is discernible, while in the sugar palm (Arenga saccharifera),
or Arenga pinnata, 2 spirals each are visible. In the Palmyra palm (Borassus
flabellifer), or Corypha elata, as well as in a number of other species of palms, 3

clear spirals are visible. The coconut palm (Cocos nucifera) as well as
Copernicia macroglossa have 5 spirals, while the African oil palm (Elaeis
guineensis) bears 8 spirals. The wild date palm (Phoenix sylvestris) and a few
other species of palms also show 8 spirals. On stout trunks of the Canary Island
palm (Phoenix canariensis), thirteen spirals can be observed. Also, in some of
these plants, 21 spirals can be found. Palms bearing 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, or 12 obvious
leaf spirals are not known.8
This phyllotaxis ratio of Fibonacci numbers is not guaranteed for every plant
but can be observed on most plants. Why do these arrangements occur? We can
speculate that some of the cases may be related to maximizing the space
available to each leaf, or the average amount of light falling on each one. Even a
tiny advantage would come to dominate, over many generations. In the case of
close-packed leaves in cabbages and succulents, such arrangements may be
crucial for availability of space.
The ubiquitous appearances of the Fibonacci numbers in nature are just
another piece of evidence that these numbers have truly phenomenal qualities.
These numbers show how mathematics is all around us in nature.
THE FIBONACCI NUMBERS ON THE HUMAN BODY
Even the human body exhibits mathematics via the Fibonacci numbers. For
example, a typical human being has 1 head, 2 arms, and 3 joints on each finger,
and 5 fingers on each arm—these are all Fibonacci numbers. In all fairness, we
must take notice that the “small” Fibonacci-numbers are just pure coincidence,
because among eight numbers from 1 to 8 there are five Fibonacci numbers.
