Therefore, you have a good chance to find a Fibonacci number purely by
coincidence. The percentage of Fibonacci numbers among the rest of all other
numbers changes dramatically if we look at bigger intervals of numbers.
At the end of the nineteenth century, many scientists were of the opinion that
the golden ratio, ϕ—which can be obtained by taking the (limiting) ratio of
consecutive Fibonacci numbers—was a divine, universal law of nature. So, how
then, they wondered, can the human being, the “pride of creation,” not have been
designed by the rules of the golden section? Some saw it as if it were; for
instance, Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) constructed the proportion of the
human body based on the golden section, ϕ (see the Vitruvian Man, figs. 7.7 and
8.32). Furthermore, he partitioned the face vertically into thirds: the forehead,
middle face, and chin. Plastic surgeons further divide the face horizontally in
fifths. In this way, we see once again how the presence of the two Fibonacci

numbers 3 and 5 come into play.
Da Vinci wasn't the only person who found the Fibonacci numbers in the
human form. The Belgian mathematician and astronomer and founder of the
social statistics, Lambert Adolphe Jacques Quetelet9 (1796–1874), and the
German author and philosopher Adolf Zeising10 (1810–1876) measured the
human body and saw its proportions related to the golden ratio, and thus greatly
influenced future generations.
The French architect Le Corbusier (Charles-Édouard Jeanneret-Gris, 1887–
1965) assumed that human body proportions are based on the golden ratio. Le
Corbusier formulated the ideal proportions in the following way:
height: 182 cm;
navel height: 113cm;
fingertips with arms upraised: 226 cm.
The ratio of height to navel height is 
 a very close approximation
of ϕ. By another measurement of the same features, he found an analogous ratio
of 
 which is another good approximation of the ratio of the two
Fibonacci numbers 13 and 21, or 
In 1948, Le Corbusier published a book titled The Modulor: A Harmonious
Measure to the Human Scale Universally Applicable to Architecture and
Mechanics, which caused somewhat of a furor in the art world. Le Corbusier
developed a technique based on the golden ratio, in which he selected the height
of a door to have a measure of 2.26 m so that a person of height 1.83 m can
touch the top with outstretched arms. Le Corbusier supported his ideas with the
following: “A man with a raised arm provides the main points of space
displacement—the foot, solar plexus, head, and fingertip of the raised arm—in
three intervals which yield a number of golden ratios that are determined by the
Fibonacci numbers.”11
The Modulor, which you may view online, consists of two scales, or bands,
which are marked with two sequences of natural numbers:
the sequence: (*) 6, 9, 15, 24, 39, 63, 102, 165, 267, 432, 698, 1130, 1829,
and an intermediate sequence: (**) 11, 18, 30, 48, 78, 126, 204, 330, 534,
863, 1397, 2260.
At this point you may be wondering, How do these numbers in any way
reflect the golden ratio? Here the author provides us with a little trick. That is, if
we divide the members of the sequence (*) by 3, we get 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55,

89, 144, 
 Then, if we divide the members of the sequence (**) by
6, we get 1.83, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 143.83, 232.83, 376. 83. By rounding
off the fractional members of each sequence, we find that we are once again
dealing exclusively with the Fibonacci numbers.
This relationship to the Fibonacci numbers results from the fact that Le
Corbusier's sequences almost approximate a geometric progression with the
common ratio being the golden ratio. With his Modulor, Le Corbusier claims to
have found a scale that adapts exceptionally well to the visual arts.
We can attach all sorts of numbers to parts of the human body. For example,
we know that there are 32 teeth and 206 bones in the human body, and then it is
estimated that there are 60,000 miles of blood vessels in the human body. There
are also estimates for the number of hairs on the head of the human body: for
blonde hair, the estimate is about 150,000; for brown hair, the estimate is
110,000; for black hair the estimate is 100,000, and for red hair the estimate is
about 90,000. Additionally, it is estimated that there are 100 trillion bacteria
living inside and on each human body.
We could go on endlessly finding numerical relationships related to the human
body, but we leave it to the reader to discover more.
THE GEOMETRY OF RAINBOWS
Have you ever tried to get to the end of a rainbow? A common legend in Irish
folklore asserts that a pot of gold is to be found at the end of a rainbow, but it is
guarded by a leprechaun. Unfortunately, it is absolutely impossible to reach the
end of a rainbow, despite the fact that you will find an astonishing number of
people on the Internet who have claimed to have found the end of a rainbow—
not to mention those who swear to have seen a leprechaun there. To understand
why it is impossible to get to the end of a rainbow, you must first understand
how, and under which circumstances, a rainbow is created. Starting with a little
input from physics, we can use geometry to explain how this intriguingly
beautiful phenomenon arises. In fact, a geometrical description of the formation
of a rainbow, capturing all the main aspects, is quite simple. Additionally,
invoking a few basic concepts from differential calculus will reveal one or two
remarkable facts about rainbows you may not have been aware of.
Let us start with some basic facts with which you may already be familiar.
When you are looking at a rainbow, you are actually looking at light that is
reflected by water droplets. This rather-imprecise statement already implies two
requirements for a rainbow to be formed: We need a strong light source and we

need water droplets in the air. It is then natural to conclude that the appearance
of a rainbow will depend on the position of the light source and the position of
the water droplets. In the following, we will consider rainbows caused by
sunlight and rain, but our discussion applies just as well for rainbows caused by
other light sources and other water sources. Since the sunlight is reflected back
from the water droplets, when we see a rainbow, the sun must always be at our
back. As trivial as this observation might seem, it already indicates that, in
addition to the position of the sun and the rain, there is a third variable that plays
an equally important role, namely, the position of the observer. Later, we will
later see that this is indeed a decisive factor in determining the possible position
