and size of a rainbow. In fact, two observers at different positions will never see
the same rainbow. Quite literally, each observer sees his or her own rainbow.
What this essentially means will become clear in the mathematical analysis of
the problem. Not being aware of this interdependence leads to the erroneous
belief that you could, at least in principle, walk to the end of a rainbow.
Figure 6.26.
Sometimes a second, fainter rainbow appears above the main one. Figure 6.26
shows a photograph of a “double rainbow,” albeit in black and white. If you have
ever seen a double rainbow in nature, you may have noticed that the colors of the
secondary rainbow are reversed compared to the primary rainbow. In the primary
rainbow, the inner arc is violet and the outer arc is red, while the secondary
rainbow has a red inner arc and a violet outer arc. Our geometrical analysis will
also explain the occurrence of secondary rainbows. The framework we will use

as the basis for our investigation is a branch of physics called geometrical optics.
In geometrical optics, the propagation of light is described in terms of rays, with
certain simplifying assumptions for the interaction of light with matter. Since
light is an electromagnetic wave, geometrical optics cannot explain optical
phenomena for which the wave nature of light is relevant, such as, for example,
interference of light waves; however, it is a very good approximation whenever
the size of structures with which the light interacts is large compared to the
wavelength of the light. The wavelength of light that is visible for the human eye
ranges from about 390 nanometers for violet light to about 700 nanometers for
red light (1 nanometer is 10–9 meters, that is, 0.000000001 meters).12 The size of
raindrops, on the other hand, varies from about 0.5 mm to at most 5 mm, hence
the diameter of a raindrop is at least 1,000 times larger than the wavelength of
visible light (we encourage you to verify this rough estimate by a short
calculation).13 It is, therefore, fine to apply the methods of geometrical optics for
the description of optical effects that may arise when sunlight hits a raindrop.
Within the geometrical framework, we will make further simplifying
assumptions. First, we consider raindrops as perfect spheres (although raindrops
start out high in the atmosphere as approximately spherical, they lose their
rounded shape as they fall). Second, we will assume that the rays of sunlight
hitting a rain shower are all parallel to each other. We can justify this assumption
with the help of another rough estimate that may be quite instructive, so we will
digress to exhibit it. The diameter of the sun, s, is approximately 1.4 million
kilometers, and the sun's average distance to the earth, d, is 150 million
kilometers. The diameter of the earth, e, is about 13,000 kilometers.14 Figure
6.27 shows a schematic diagram from which we can easily calculate the
maximum angle between any two light rays emitted by the sun and hitting the
earth (in physics, this is called the divergence of the light rays).
Figure 6.27.
To find the angle a, we consider the right triangle ABC. We have 
 and 
 Solving for α and substituting the values for s, e, and d, we get α ≈ 0.5º,
which is so small that for our purposes we can safely regard the sunlight that hits
the earth as being composed of parallel rays. There is one more ingredient we

need before we can delve into the geometry of rainbows. When a ray of light
strikes a surface of water, a portion of it is reflected at the surface, and a portion
is refracted (or “bent”) into the water. You can see the refraction of light at the
boundary surface between air and water, when you put a drinking straw in a
glass of water, or when you stand upright in a shallow swimming pool and look
at your legs. The physical reason for the refraction of light as it passes through a
boundary between two different media is that the velocity of light is different in
different media. If c is the speed of light in vacuum, then  is the speed of light in
a medium with refractive index n. The precise relationship between the angle of
incidence and the angle of refraction is described by Snell's law, named after
Dutch astronomer Willebrord Snellius (1580–1626). The angles are measured
with respect to the normal (or perpendicular) of the tangent plane at the point
where the ray strikes the surface.
Figure 6.28.
If a ray of light passes from air (medium 1) to water (medium 2), then the
angle of refraction α2 can be expressed in terms of the angle of incidence α1 as
α2 = arcsin
 where n = 1.33. Note that for an air-water boundary, the angle of
refraction will always be smaller than the angle of incidence since n > 1, that is,
the ray will be refracted toward the normal. We may also reverse the direction of
the arrows in figure 6.28; that is, a light ray passing from water to air will be
refracted away from the normal. A portion of the light will be reflected at the
boundary, where the angle of reflection is equal to the angle of incidence (by the
law of reflection).
We are now prepared to consider a light ray hitting a spherical raindrop.
Figure 6.29 depicts this situation in the plane that is defined by the light ray and
the center of the raindrop. An incident ray of light hits the drop of water at point
A at an angle α, is refracted into the drop at an angle β = arcsin 
 and then

proceeds to point B. Of course, some of the incident light rays are reflected at A,
but they are not relevant for our considerations. At point B, the refracted ray is
reflected to point A’, where it is finally refracted back into the air. Again, some
rays will already be refracted into the air at point B, and some will be reflected
back into the drop at point A’, but those cases are of no relevance for the primary
rainbow, so we have omitted them in the diagram.
Figure 6.29.
Let us consider how the angles at points B and A′ can be determined: Since
AC = CB, which makes ABC an isosceles triangle, the angle of incidence at point
B is β. Here the ray is reflected with the same angle (by the law of reflection).
Then, since A′BC is also an isosceles triangle, the angle of incidence at point A′
must be β as well. Finally, as Snell's law works in both directions, the angle of
refraction for the ray leaving the drop at point A′ must be equal to α again. To
find the angles at A′, we could also argue that the path of the ray must be
symmetric with respect to line CB. What we are actually interested in is the
angle ϕ, measured between the incident ray and the reflected ray as labeled in
figure 6.29. Using triangle ACD, we can write  = 180° – a – ∠ACB; and, from
triangle ACB, we get ∠ACB = 180º – 2β. Combining these two equations, we
obtain ϕ = 2 · (2β – α). Upon the substitution β = arcsin 
 this becomes ϕ = 4
· arcsin 
 – 2α, which represents the angle between the ray striking the
