raindrop at A and the ray leaving the raindrop at point A′ after two refractions
and one reflection. Note that we have only considered one specific ray in figure
6.29. What happens when a bunch of parallel rays of sunlight strikes the
raindrop? (See fig. 6.30.)

Figure 6.30.
Each ray has a different angle of incidence and will, therefore, be refracted at
a different angle. Recall, at each boundary interaction (labeled by A, B, and A′ in
fig. 6.29) only a portion of the light will follow the path we have drawn. Some
light is already reflected at point A, some is refracted back into the air at point B,
and some is reflected back into the drop at point A′. Thus, the total intensity of
light leaving the drop after exactly two refractions and one reflection will be
significantly lower than the total intensity of the incident light. Nevertheless, it is
exactly this portion of the rays that forms the primary rainbow. But why can we
see the rainbow at all, when the overall intensity is so low? The answer to this
question lies in the relationship between the angle ϕ and the angle of incidence,
α. Let us again consider a large number of parallel rays, as in figure 6.30.
However, there we have only drawn a section of the raindrop. To get the real
picture, we have to imagine the raindrop in three dimensions. The light rays are
then uniformly distributed over the whole cross-sectional area of the raindrop.
Any two rays with different distances dA and dB to the symmetry axis of the
raindrop will have different angles of incidence α and β. (See fig. 6.31.)

Figure 6.31.
The distances dA and dB are called the impact parameters of the rays AA′ and
BB′. If we let the configuration in figure 6.31 rotate around the axis of symmetry
of the raindrop, we obtain two circles with radii dA and dB, representing the
impact points of all rays that enter at an angle α or angle β, respectively. If dA is
twice as large as dB, then the circumference of the circle with radius dA will be
twice the circumference of the circle with radius dB. Hence, there will also be
twice as many rays hitting the raindrop at an angle α than there will be rays
entering at an angle β. This means that the distribution of light is not
homogeneous over all possible angles of incidence. Most of the rays will have a
comparatively large impact parameter, and, thus, will have a larger angle of
incidence. We have already calculated the total deflection angle ϕ (see fig. 6.29)
in terms of the angle of incidence α: A ray hitting the raindrop at an angle α will
leave the raindrop in a direction such that the angle between the incident ray and
the reflected ray is 4 · arcsin 
 – 2α. This equation allows us to compute the
total deflection angle ϕ = 4 · arcsin 
 – 2α for any given angle of incidence.
The graph in figure 6.32 shows the values of the total deflection angle for all
possible angles of incidence (from 0° to 90°).
Figure 6.32.
We see that the curve representing ϕ as a function of α has a maximum at an
angle of incidence α ≈ 60º and a maximum deflection of ϕ ≈ 42º, meaning that ϕ
cannot get larger than about 42º. Moreover, we can see from the diagram that
rays with angles of incidence between 50º and 70º will leave the raindrop with

an angle ϕ very close to 42º. Thus, the intensity of the outgoing rays will not be
distributed homogeneously; it will be concentrated around an angle of 42º. A ray
with the proper angle of incidence, such that the deflection angle ϕ exactly
attains its maximally possible value, is called the “Descartes ray,” since the
French mathematician and philosopher René Descartes (1596–1650) was the
first person who calculated this angle and provided a complete and correct
explanation of the formation of rainbows.15
In figure 6.33 we show the whole interaction for a parallel bundle of incident
rays coming in above the horizontal axis. All rays shown are refracted into the
droplet, then reflected once inside the droplet, and finally refracted back into the
air again. All rays emerging from the droplet are below the horizontal axis. We
can see the concentration of intensity at the lower boundary of the bunch of
outgoing rays, precisely at an angle of 42º with respect to the horizontal.
Figure 6.33.
However, in figure 6.33, we have omitted the rays coming in below the
horizontal. To get the “full picture,” the following two diagrams (figure 6.34)
include the rays below the horizontal axis as well. This basically means to
additionally reflect all the rays in figure 6.33 about the horizontal axis, leading to
the picture in figure 6.34a. It shows both the incident rays and the rays returning
after two refractions and one reflection. To better recognize the intensity peaks at
42º above and below the horizontal, the picture in figure 6.34b shows only the
returning rays, but not the incident rays.

Figure 6.34a.
Figure 6.34b.
These diagrams show only a particular section through the droplet, defined by
its center and the incident ray. For a three-dimensional picture, we have to
imagine the formation that arises when we rotate the two-dimensional plots in
figure 6.34 around the horizontal axis. Most of the rays emerging from the
droplet will be concentrated on the boundary of a circular cone with half-angle
42º. The intensity in this direction is sufficiently high to make a rainbow visible.
But where do we actually see the rainbow, and why is it colored? First of all, rain
showers contain many droplets of water, at different heights and different points
above the ground. Each droplet that catches sunlight will reemit light that is
essentially confined to the boundary of a circular cone with half-angle 42º. To
see this light sent out by the droplets, the light rays must strike our eyes. This

means that our position in relation to the sun and the rain must be such that there
exist view lines from our eyes to sunlit raindrops in the shower, which include an
angle of 42º with a straight line drawn from the sun to the respective raindrops.
Since all light rays from the sun are parallel to each other, this means that the
same angle of 42º will also occur between a straight line drawn from the sun to
the eye of the observer, and a view line from the observer's eye to a raindrop in
the rainbow. This can be seen from figure 6.35. The collection of all view lines
including an angle of 42º with a straight line drawn from the sun to the eye of the
observer will form a circular cone with half-angle 42º, as can also be inferred
from figure 6.35, where we have indicated part of this cone by dashed lines.
Figure 6.35.
It's exactly the light rays along this cone that produce the rainbow. A rainbow
will always appear under an angle of 42º, measured from a straight line drawn
from the sun through the eye of the observer. This line can also be identified as
