the line drawn from the observer's head to her or his head's shadow on the
ground. Since we carry this 42º cone with us when we change our position on
the ground, the rainbow we see will move with us. Its light will come from
different positions in the rain shower. This explains why we can never reach a
rainbow. The rainbow travels with us as we move. Different observers will see
light coming from different positions within the rain shower and thus a different
rainbow.
From figure 6.35, it is clear that rainbows actually form full circles, but when
we are standing on the ground, we can only see light that emerges from
raindrops above the horizon. We usually cannot see a rainbow's lower, hidden
half. However, if you are flying in a plane toward a rain shower, with the sun at
your back, you may be lucky enough to see a full-circle rainbow, since light
from the raindrops can also reach you from below. If you are interested in seeing
a full, circular rainbow, another option would be to climb on a tall mountain

when the weather conditions are promising, and wait.
Why do rainbows have colors? Each ray of sunlight is actually composed of a
whole spectrum of colors, as Isaac Newton (1643–1727) first noticed.16 Newton
also showed that red light has a slightly different refractive index in water
compared to violet light, which is at the other end of the visible spectrum. The
refractive index depends on the wavelength of light and is approximately n =
1.332 for red light and n = 1.344 for violet light.17 For the other colors of the
rainbow, the values lie in between these two extremes. Thus, the curve shown in
the graph of figure 6.32 is slightly different for light of a different color. The
maxima are attained at slightly different angles, implying that the high-intensity
cones will not form at exactly 42° for all colors, but between approximately
40.5° (violet) and 42.2° (red light). Hence each color will form its own arc, and,
thus, we see a whole band of colors. There are, in fact, millions of colors in a
rainbow. The left picture in figure 6.36 shows the paths of the rays for four
different colors.
Figure 6.36a.
Figure 6.36b.
The right picture shows how a secondary rainbow is formed. It is composed of
light rays reflected twice inside the raindrop before they are refracted back into
the air. Since each internal reflection reverses the order of the colors, the colors
of a secondary rainbow are reversed as well. Secondary rainbows are much
fainter than primary rainbows, since additional intensity is lost at the second
reflection. They appear on the boundaries of cones with half-angles between
about 52° and 54° with respect to a line drawn from the sun to the observer's eye,
representing the apex of the cones.
Both the primary and the secondary rainbow are perfect circular arcs, centered
at the antisolar point (see figure 6.37). The antisolar point is the imaginary point
on the celestial sphere exactly opposite the sun from the viewpoint of an

observer. Thus, if the sun is above the horizon, your antisolar point will be below
the horizon. During sunrise or sunset, when the sun is just crossing the horizon,
your antisolar point will also be crossing the horizon, exactly opposite to the sun.
Since your antisolar point is always the center of the rainbow you are seeing,
you will at most be able to see a half-circle (during sunrise or sunset). If you are
standing on flat land, the hidden half of the rainbow would be below your
horizon. However, there is neither sunlight nor rain below your horizon, so you
can see only the upper half. Looking back at figure 6.35, we can also conclude
that whenever the sun is higher than an angle of 42º above the horizon, we
cannot see a primary rainbow at all, since every part of it would be below the
horizon. On the other hand, if you are at a higher altitude, for example, on a
plane or on a high mountain, then your horizon will also be at this altitude, and,
thus, there may be both sunlight and rain below your horizon. You would then
have the rare opportunity to see more than half a circle of a rainbow. You would
even be able to see a full “raincircle.”
Figure 6.37. René Descartes, Discours de la méthode, 1637.
Of course, you have to be very lucky to experience a rainbow exceeding a
half-circle in nature. But, as a matter of fact, it is not difficult to create an
artificial rainbow in your garden, even one that is larger than a half-circle. You
may have already done so as a child but have simply forgotten. You only need to
climb a ladder, with the sun at your back, and turn on a garden hose. If you then
adjust the hose's nozzle so the water comes out in a fine spray, a rainbow will
appear in the spray. Moving up and down the ladder, the circular arc will

increase and decrease, corresponding to your altitude.
We have now viewed and inspected how mathematics appears in nature. Our
journey continues as we observe how man-made objects can be explained
mathematically, specifically art and architecture.

When we apply mathematics to art and architecture, there is one overriding
concept that seems to be omnipresent. It is the golden ratio, which is sometimes
intentionally included, and, other times, it appears because various artists’
perception of beauty in geometry tends to gravitate toward the rectangle shaped
as the golden ratio. After we define the golden ratio, we will demonstrate its
beauty and show its appearance in art and architecture. However, mathematics
also can be seen in certain nonlinear examples, such as the catenary curve (a
hanging chain supported on both ends at equal heights). We also will notice how
the viewing perspective of art and in art is guided by mathematical principles. A
drawing that exhibits the kind of perspective that allows us to appreciate depth
perception is one such example, and there is also a mathematical justification for
how we can stand to observe a sculpture or a painting in a museum. It needs to
be understood that the mathematical appearances in art and architecture are
practically limitless, and we make a small attempt to expose some of the more
prominent examples here.
GOLDEN RATIO SIGHTINGS
It should not be so surprising that in art, as well as many other areas,
mathematics has a way of manifesting itself. Since art has to be appealing to the
human eye, the one overarching mathematical concept that seems to have
positioned itself well in the arts and architecture is that of the golden ratio.
Before exposing the appearances of this golden ratio we should define it.
Geometrically, it is the ratio of the lengths of two line segments that allows us to
make the following equality of two ratios:1 that is, that the longer segment length
(L) is to the shorter segment length (S) as the sum of the lengths of the segments

(L + S) is to the longer segment length (L). Symbolically, this is written as 
(See fig. 7.1.)
