ratio.
Figure 7.9. Albrecht Dürer.
Sir Theodore Cook (1867–1928) analyzed Sandro Botticelli's (1445–1510)
painting The Birth of Venus (1477)—shown in figure 7.10—with the aid of the

golden ratio, whereby he placed a number scale on the figure of Venus, which
had the first seven powers of ϕ. In many cases, we still do not know if the use of
the golden ratio or the Fibonacci numbers was intentional or serendipitous.
Many scholars have collected information in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries to search for applications of the golden ratio. These applications need
to be critically and sensitively inspected. Oftentimes, we stumble on fractions
that approach the golden ratio and immediately assume that the golden ratio was
intended. We must be careful not to draw conclusions where they aren't
necessarily warranted. Conscious use of the golden ratio often cannot be
substantiated.
Figure 7.10. The Birth of Venus, Sandro Botticelli.
Whether architects and artists consciously use the golden ratio, when it
appeared clearly in their work, was discussed by Dan Pedoe (1910–1998) in his
book Geometry and the Visual Arts.11 He argues that especially in Renaissance
architecture, there is hardly any proof that the golden ratio was used
intentionally, although it motivated great interest in the field. As they say, beauty
is in the eye of the beholder, and so the beholder must make the judgment about
the use of the golden ratio. We will concentrate our observation of paintings to a
few samples where the golden ratio appears, yet there are countless additional
examples that you can find in art and architecture over the past several centuries.
Let us begin with perhaps one of the most famous paintings in Western
civilization, Leonardo da Vinci's Mona Lisa, which was painted 1503–1506 and
is on grand exhibit in the Louvre in Paris. (See fig. 7.11.)

Figure 7.11. Mona Lisa, Leonardo da Vinci.
Incidentally, King François I of France paid 15.3 kilograms of gold for this
priceless masterpiece. To begin our inspection of the painting, we can draw a
rectangle around Mona Lisa's face and find that this rectangle is a golden
rectangle, as shown in figure 7.12.
Figure 7.12.
In figure 7.13, you will notice several triangles; the two largest are golden
triangles, which are isosceles triangles whose base and side are in the golden
ratio.

Figure 7.13.
Furthermore, in figure 7.14, you will notice specific points on the body of
Mona Lisa as golden ratios. Since da Vinci illustrated Pacioli's book De divina
proportione, which thoroughly discussed the golden ratio, it can be assumed that
he consciously was guided by this magnificent ratio.
Figure 7.14.
Raphael's (1483–1520) Sistine Madonna (1513) also exhibits the golden ratio.
The horizontal line indicated in figure 7.15, which emanates from the eyes of
Pope Sixtus II and the head of Saint Barbara, divides the height of the picture
into the golden ratio and also partitions the figure of the Madonna into two equal
parts. In figure 7.16, you will notice the white lines emanating from selected
points in the figure in determining the golden ratio from another point of view,

namely, the Madonna's figure is divided by the golden ratio. You will also notice
the equilateral triangle superimposed on the picture in figure 7.16 exactly
encases the four heads. Whether Raphael consciously selected these dimensions
with the golden ratio in mind or whether these were merely the product of an
artistic eye remains the master's secret.
Figure 7.15. Sistine Madonna, Raphael.
Figure 7.16.
In figure 7.17, the regular pentagram superimposed over Raphael's Madonna
Alba (1511–1513), which is exhibited in the National Gallery, in Washington,
DC, is clearly formed along appropriate linear parts and once again demonstrates
Raphael's penchant for the golden ratio, which is embedded in the regular

pentagram, as its sides are divided into the golden ratio.
Figure 7.17. Madonna Alba, Raphael.
Let's jump forward a few hundred years, to the French painter Georges Seurat
(1859–1891), who was known for the strict geometric structure to his works.
Although he used colors to a dramatic extent, Seurat wanted to highlight his use
of geometric space as the main attraction and thereby set the groundwork for
modern art.
Figure 7.18. Circus Sideshow, Georges Seurat.
Seurat's painting Circus Sideshow (1888), exhibited at the Metropolitan

Museum of Art in New York, is replete with evidence of the golden ratio. Some
observers see the golden ratio produced by the horizontal line at the top edge of
the banister, and in the vertical direction by the line just to the right of the main
figure. Others find that the rectangle formed by these two lines and the
horizontal line just below the nine lights is a golden rectangle. The 8 × 3 unit
rectangle (at the upper left side) gives further evidence to the possibility that the
artist was aware of the relationship of the Fibonacci numbers to the golden ratio.
In Seurat's Bathers at Asnières (1883), exhibited at the Tate Gallery, in
London, the golden ratio can be seen, as can several golden rectangles. (See fig.
7.19.)
Figure 7.19. Bathers at Asnières, Georges Seurat.
Some artists, such as the Icelandic artist, Hreinn Friðfinnsson (1943–), clearly
based their art on the golden rectangle and the golden spiral, which is traced by
the quarter circles in the squares cut off from the golden rectangle. Friðfinnsson's
piece called Principle and Temptation (1990), exhibited at the Museum of Art in
Liechtenstein, Vaduz, can be seen in Figure 7.20, where each quarter circle cuts
the prior radius in the golden ratio.

Figure 7.20. (Hreinn Friðfinnsson, Principle and Temptation, 1990–2013, C-print on aluminum,
133 × 200 cm; Courtesy of the artist and Galerie Nordenhake Berlin / Stockholm.)
As mentioned previously, the golden ratio can be found in many pieces of art
and architecture. As such, we offer a list of works of art where there is some
evidence that the golden ratio has been embedded in the composition of the
work. Whether it was intentional or intuitive is open for discussion and research.
Many of these can be found in books, online, or, for the adventurous reader, in
person!
