Athens (fig. 7.26), where he also employed the concept of perspectivity.

Figure 7.26. School of Athens, Raphael.
We show the lines of perspectivity in figure 7.27. Once again, we notice how
with this technique perfect depth perception is achieved in the artwork.
Figure 7.27. School of Athens, Raphael.
About the same time Leonardo da Vinci created his masterpieces, the famous
German artist Albrecht Dürer also experimented with perspective in his
drawings. In 1506, he made a special trip to Bologna, Italy, with the intent to
learn about the secret theoretical foundation of a process that he already had
seemed to master, namely, capturing perspectivity in his artwork. In figure 7.28
we notice how Dürer very consciously was aware of the concept of perspective.
This was further substantiated when he published his manual in 1525,
Underweysung der Messung (“Instruction in Measurement”), which was a
treatise on the concept of perspectivity in geometry. This was targeted at well-
educated artists and was followed by other such manuals for less well-prepared
artists by other experts, such as Hieronymus Rodler (?–1539), who in 1531
published a simpler version titled Eyn schön nützlich Büchlein und
Underweisung der Kunst des Messens (“A Nice Useful Booklet and Instruction

of the Art of Measurement”).
Figure 7.28. Man Drawing a Lute, Albrecht Dürer.
We can see the actual effect of his consciousness with using perspective to
draw his famous etching St. Jerome in His Study, shown in figure 7.29.

Figure 7.29. St. Jerome in His Study, Albrecht Dürer.
In a painting, a more realistic portrayal of a scene can also be achieved by
creating the illusion of light. Playing with light and shadow can significantly
enhance perspective appearance. A wonderful example of this is the masterpiece
The Calling of Saint Matthew by Michelangelo Merisi da Caravaggio (1571–
1610), which is shown in figure 7.30. For a convincing illusion of light falling
through the window, it is important that the artist is aware of the correct shape of
cast shadows. Drawing cast shadows realistically involves using the geometric
principles of perspective drawing, since the boundary of a shadow can be
constructed by using perspective lines emanating from the light source.

Figure 7.30. The Calling of Saint Matthew, Caravaggio.
When we regard the depiction of a real object on a painting, we basically see a
projection of the object onto a plane that is represented by the canvas. If this
projection is distorted, the viewer might have to occupy a very specific vantage
point to reconstitute the image. This is called perspectival anamorphosis, and it
requires the artist to master the laws of perspective geometry. While Leonardo da
Vinci was probably the first to experiment with distorted images that appear in
natural form when viewed at a certain angle, perhaps the most famous example
of perspectival anamorphosis can be found in the painting The Ambassadors, by
Hans Holbein the Younger (1497–1543), which is exhibited in the National
Gallery in London. A highly distorted shape at the bottom will turn into the
plastic image of a skull when viewed from an acute angle. Although by far not as
impressive as the original, you may convince yourself of this remarkable effect
by looking at the photograph of Holbein's painting shown in figure 7.31 from a
different angle until the seemingly amorphous shape toward the bottom of the
image eventually becomes a perfectly rendered painting of a skull (angle the
book away from you, keeping the left side closer to your body and the right side
farther from your body).

Figure 7.31. The Ambassadors, Hans Holbein the Younger.
There are countless other examples of perspectivity used in art, especially
where the artist wanted to accurately capture depth perception. Once again,
mathematics seems to play a significant role where we might not have expected
it to.
NUMBERS IN ART
We can also revisit the renowned German artist Albrecht Dürer (1471–1528),
who lived in Nuremberg, Germany, and, aside from his art, has also provided us
with a rather-unusual number arrangement called a magic square. Magic squares
are square arrangements of numbers for which the sum of each of the columns,
rows, and diagonals are all equal. However, there is one magic square that stands
out among the rest for its beauty and additional properties—not to mention its
curious appearance. This particular magic square has many properties beyond
those required for a square arrangement of numbers to be considered “magic.”
This magic square even comes to us through art, and not through the usual
mathematical channels. It is depicted in the background of Dürer's famous 1514
engraving Melencolia I (see fig. 7.32).

Figure 7.32. Melencolia I, Albrecht Dürer, 1514.
As we begin to examine the magic square in Dürer's etching, we should take
note that most of Dürer's works were signed by him with his initials, one over
the other, and with the year in which the work was made included. Here we find
it in the dark-shaded region near the lower right side of the picture (see figs. 7.32
and 7.33). We notice that it was made in the year 1514.
Figure 7.33. Initials of Albrecht Dürer, AD, and the year, 1514.
Consider now the magic square located in Melencolia I. The observant reader
may notice that the two center cells of the bottom row of the Dürer magic square
depict the year as well. Let us examine this magic square more closely. (See fig.
7.34.)

Figure 7.34. Dürer's magic square.
First, let's make sure that it is, in fact, a true magic square. When we evaluate
the sum of each of the rows, columns, and diagonals, we get the result 34. This
feature alone is all that would be required for this square matrix of numbers to be
considered a “magic square.” However, this Dürer magic square has many more
properties that other magic squares do not have. Let us now marvel at some of
these extra properties.
The four corner numbers have a sum of 34:
16 + 13 + 1 + 4 = 34
Each of the four corner 2 × 2 squares has a sum of 34:
16 + 3 + 5 + 10 = 34
2 + 13 + 11 + 8 = 34
9 + 6 + 4 + 15 = 34
7 + 12 + 14 + 1 = 34
The center 2 × 2 square has a sum of 34:
