THE MOST OVERLOOKED CURVE
One of the most pervasive curves in our environment is the curve that holds up a
suspension bridge. Two classic examples are on either side of the United States.
On the West Coast, we have the famous Golden Gate Bridge, as shown in figure

7.36. And on the East Coast, we have the famous George Washington Bridge,
shown in figure 7.37.
Figure 7.36.
Figure 7.37.
Although these curves very closely resemble one of the most popular curves
we learn about in our high-school mathematics course, the parabola, the curve
that holds up suspension bridges is not a parabola. In 1683 the famous Italian
scientist Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) claimed that this curve, also seen as a
hanging chain supported by two vertical poles, is, in fact, a parabola. The
German mathematician Joachim Jungius (1587–1657) in 1639 showed Galileo to
be wrong.22 The actual equation describing this curve was finally established in
1691 largely by the Dutch mathematician Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695), who
in a letter to a collaborator, the German mathematician Gottfried Leibniz (1646–
1716), referred to this curve as a “catenaria,” which was derived from the Latin
word Catena, which means “chain.”23 The current Anglicized word catenary
seems to be attributed to United States President Thomas Jefferson in a letter to
Thomas Paine dated September 15, 1788, in which he described the design of
the bridge.24 In addition to Leibniz and Huygens, Swiss mathematician Johann
Bernoulli (1667–1748) helped develop the formula for the catenary curve. When
a chain is suspended from two equally high supports and is dropping at x = 0 to

its lowest height y = a, its height y as a function of x is given by the equation: 
 or, at a more advanced level (and also in the xy-plane), it can be
expressed in terms of a hyperbolic cosine function as y = a cosh 
 This formula
will still hold for different distances between the two poles holding a hanging
chain, however, for different values of a.
The same formula will also hold if the supports are not equally high. In this
case, the lowest height of the chain will occur closer to the shorter of the two
supports. The formula applies for any chain supported only at its ends, as long as
the x-coordinate in the equation is measured from the point of lowest height, a.
We can also see a catenary in its most simple form, a hanging chain as we show
in figure 7.38.
Figure 7.38. (Image from Wikimedia Creative Commons, author: Kamel 15; licensed under CC
BY-SA 3.0 Unported.)
If we invert the catenary, we can create a stable, self-supporting arch, which is
evidenced by the famous Gateway Arch in St. Louis, Missouri, which is shown
in figure 7.39.

Figure 7.39. (Image from Wikimedia Creative Commons, author: Bev Sykes from Davis, CA;
licensed under CC BY-SA 2.0.)
So now you can see that a very often-observed curve that most people
(including Galileo) thought was a parabola, in fact, is not, and yet we do
understand its properties, thanks to the work of many brilliant mathematicians.
THE ONE-SIDED BELT—THE MÖBIUS STRIP
Surely you have seen the symbol shown in figure 7.40. This ubiquitous recycling
symbol has been around for decades and decorates many products of a variety of
sorts. The symbol is a somewhat-artistic version of the famous Möbius strip, and
it was created in 1970 by Gary Anderson, a student at the University of Southern
California, to symbolize recycling.25
Figure 7.40.
Merely as an artistic descriptor, this structure would have no real significance
for us in mathematics. However, the Möbius strip has a very significant role in
industry and beyond. For example, when we observe a fan belt being used in an
automobile engine, as well as in some industrial machinery, the belt after time
will wear out on the inside surface. Imagine a belt that does not have an inside or

an outside surface but merely has one single surface. Such a belt was discovered
independently by the two German mathematicians August Ferdinand Möbius
(1790–1868) and Johan Benedict Listing (1808–1882) in 1858. You might ask
yourself, How can a belt have only one side? You can easily construct one by
taking a strip of paper and giving it one twist before connecting the two ends,
and you will get a loop that looks like that shown in figure 7.41.
Figure 7.41. (Image from Wikimedia Creative Commons, author: David Benbennick, own work;
licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.)
To convince yourself that this strip has only one side, take a pencil and run the
pencil along the center of the surface without lifting it up. Eventually, you will
find that the line you are drawing will connect to the point at which you began.
Therefore, a fan belt in the form of a Möbius strip will have only one surface,
which would be twice as long as the fan belt would have been without that twist.
It will last longer than a conventional fan belt, where only one side of the belt
would be in contact with the pulleys and thus get worn out sooner.
There are some curious properties of such a strip of paper. Suppose with a pair
of scissors you cut the strip along the line you drew halfway from the edge. The
result will be a long strip with two twists in it, which is not a Möbius strip. The
reason for this is that the original strip had only one edge, and now you created a
new strip with two edges, which was twice as long as the original strip. If we
continue this cutting process, by cutting along the center of this new strip, we
will end up with two strips interlocking, with each having two full twists.
Suppose we take our original Möbius strip and this time we cut along a line
that is one-third of the distance from the edge. This time we will form two new
strips: one will be a Möbius strip, which will have one-third the width of the

original Möbius strip, yet it will have the same length as the original Möbius
strip. The other strip will be twice as long as the original Möbius strip and will
have two twists in it.
When an odd number of twists to the original strip of paper is made, a form of
Möbius strip results, but this does not happen for an even number of twists. An
interested reader may wish to experiment by creating various versions of the
strips and cutting them at different distances from the edge. The results can be
quite astonishing!
The famous Mexican sculptor Sebastián (Enrique Carbajal, 1947–) created a
three-dimensional Möbius strip, which we show in figure 7.42.
Figure 7.42.
Here we see a geometric marvel that shows itself as a consumer symbol, an
