efficient component in industry, as well as a manifestation in the arts. As you can
see from our discussion, it also has some entertaining aspects and surprises that
bring some enjoyment from the field of mathematics.
Having journeyed through an artistic world dominated by mathematical
occurrences and explanations, we now embark on a discussion of where we find
mathematics helping us understand our structural environment from a
mathematical and technological point of view.

In today's world we can hardly escape being technologically involved. However,
too often we just take for granted the technology around us. We observe the
workings of a clock without thinking about its “timing.” We appreciate timed
traffic lights without thinking about how this works. We are amazed at the
effects of a whispering spot in a large hall, and then we wonder why that works.
These are just a few of the technology aspects that we encounter in our daily
experiences that can be explained through simple mathematics. Let's continue
now by considering these and a few other such encounters with “hidden”
mathematics.
A FASCINATION WITH THE CLOCK
It is not uncommon to look at the clock many times during the day. When we
look at a clock, we might wonder at what time the hands of a clock overlap, at
what time they form an exact right angle, or, for that matter, at what time they
form a straight angle. We do that by mere observation, but mathematics provides
us with a very simple technique for determining the answers to these questions.
For instance, at what time (exactly) will the hands of a clock overlap after four
o'clock?
A typical first reaction to answer this question would be that the answer is
simply 4:20. When you reconsider that the hour hand moves uniformly, you may
begin to estimate the answer to be between 4:21 and 4:22. The hour hand moves
through an interval between minute markers every 12 minutes. Therefore, it will
leave the interval 4:21–4:22 at 4:24. This, however, doesn't answer the original
question about the exact time of this overlap.

The best way to begin to understand the movement of the hands of a clock is
by considering the hands traveling independently around the clock at uniform
speeds. The minute markings on the clock (from now on referred to as
“markers”) will serve to denote distance as well as time. An analogy should be
drawn here to the uniform motion of automobiles (a popular and overused topic
for verbal problems in an elementary algebra course). That is, the hands of the
clock can be seen analogously to a fast automobile (the minute hand) overtaking
a slower automobile (the hour hand).
It might be helpful to find the distance necessary for a car traveling at 60 mph
to overtake a car with a head start of 20 miles and traveling at 5 mph. (The m
here represents “miles” but could just as easily represent “markers.”) Now
consider four o'clock as the initial time on the clock. Our problem will be to
determine exactly when the minute hand will overtake the hour hand after four
o'clock. Consider the speed of the hour hand to be r, then the speed of the minute
hand must be 12r. We seek the distance, measured by the number of markers
traveled, that the minute hand must travel to overtake the hour hand. Let us refer
to this distance as d markers. Hence, the distance that the hour hand travels is d –
20 markers, since it has a 20-marker head start over the minute hand. For this to
take place, the time required for the minute hand, 
 and for the hour hand, 
would have to be the same. Therefore, 
 and then 
 Thus, the
minute hand will overtake the hour hand at exactly 
Consider the expression 
 The quantity 20 is the number of markers
that the minute hand had to travel to get to the desired position, assuming the
hour hand remained stationary. However, quite obviously, the hour hand does not
remain stationary. Hence, we had to multiply this quantity by 
 since the minute
hand must travel  as far. Let us refer to the fraction  as the correction factor.
To become familiar with the correction factor, let's consider a few simple
problems. For example, you choose to find the exact time when the hands of a
clock overlap between seven and eight o'clock. Here we would first determine
how far the minute hand would have to travel from the “12” position to the
position of the hour hand, assuming again that the hour hand remains stationary.
Then, by multiplying the number of markers, 35, by the correction factor, 
 we
will obtain the exact time that the hands will overlap: 
To enhance our understanding of this procedure, consider a person checking a
wristwatch against an electric clock and noticing that the hands on the
wristwatch overlap every 65 minutes (as measured by the electric clock). We
then ask ourselves whether the wristwatch is fast, slow, or accurate. To do this,
you may wish to consider the problem in the following way. At twelve o'clock,

the hands of a clock overlap exactly. Using the previously described method, we
find that the hands will again overlap at exactly 
 then at exactly 
 then
at exactly 
 and so on. Each time, there is an interval of 
 minutes between
overlapping positions. Hence, the person's watch is inaccurate by  of a minute.
Then is the wristwatch fast or slow?
There are many other interesting, and sometimes rather-difficult, problems
that can be made simple by this correction factor. You may very easily pose your
own problems. For example, you may wish to find the exact times when the
hands of a clock will be perpendicular (or form a straight angle) between, say,
eight and nine o'clock. Again, you would need to determine the number of
markers that the minute hand would have to travel from the “12” position until it
forms the desired angle with the stationary hour hand. Then, simply multiply this
number by the correction factor of  to obtain the exact actual time. That is, to
find the exact time that the hands of a clock are first perpendicular between eight
and nine o'clock, determine the desired position of the minute hand when the
hour hand remains stationary (here, on the 25-minute marker). Then, multiply 25
by  to get 
 which is the exact time when the hands are first perpendicular
after eight o'clock.
