One might also justify the correction factor  for the interval between overlaps
in the following way: Think of the hands of a clock at noon. During the next 12
hours (that is, until the hands reach the same position at midnight) the hour hand
makes one revolution, the minute hand makes 12 revolutions, and the minute
hand coincides with the hour hand 11 times (including midnight, but not noon,
starting just after the hands separate at noon). Because each hand rotates at a
uniform rate, the hands overlap each  of an hour, or 65  minutes. This can be
extended to other situations, which can prove to be fun while at the same time
showing how mathematics can be applied to the travels of the hands of a clock.
THE MATHEMATICS OF PAPER FOLDING
Take a piece of paper, fold it in half, then fold it in half again, and keep folding
the paper in half. How many times can you fold it before it won't fold any
further? It is a counterintuitive fact that it is impossible to fold a piece of paper
in half more than seven or eight times. With each additional folding, the
thickness of the folded paper doubles, while its surface area is halved (see fig.
8.1).

Figure 8.1.
Although a single sheet of paper is very thin, after the seventh folding we
would actually have a pile of 27 = 128 layers, which is approximately a finger's
breadth in height. Considering that the surface area would have shrunk
accordingly, approximately to the dimension of a thumb if we had begun with a
letter-sized sheet, it is virtually impossible to accomplish a seventh or clearly an
eighth fold, unless we use exceptionally thin paper. While this is indeed
surprising and might be a good bar bet, the problem is actually subtler than it
seems. First of all, it is the rapid growth rate of the geometric progression 2n that
contradicts our intuition. To illustrate this common misjudgment, consider
continuously doubling a pile of standard paper until it reaches the height of the
Empire State Building. Starting with a single sheet of paper, it would only
require 22 doublings until the pile would surmount the Empire State Building.
This example demonstrates how misleading our intuition can be in the context of
exponential growth rates.
However, returning to the problem of paper folding, things are a bit more
complicated. The number of folds is not limited because of the fact that the force
we would have to apply in each additional folding process grows exponentially,
eventually exceeding the muscular strength of our fingers. There is a different,
purely geometric reason for the existence of a maximum possible number of
folds. This was first recognized in 2002 by Britney C. Gallivan (1985–), while
she was a high-school student in Pomona, California.1 She studied the paper-

folding problem for extra credit in her mathematics class and showed that there
exists a theoretical folding limit for any given piece of paper. This limit cannot
be overcome, not even by an arbitrarily powerful folding machine. However,
Gallivan also demonstrated that it is possible to fold a sheet of paper
considerably more often than just seven or eight times, disproving a common
and longstanding belief. How is this possible? Instead of folding in alternate
directions, she took a long strip of paper and folded it in a single direction, as we
show it in figure 8.2.
Figure 8.2.
Gallivan used a jumbo roll of industrial toilet paper to fold a single piece of
paper twelve times in half. The uncoiled toilet paper measured 4,000 feet in
length, and folding it twelve times in half resulted in an approximately one-foot-
long packet of paper, consisting of 212 = 4096 layers. In 2012, students of St.
Mark's school in Massachusetts achieved thirteen folds with a more than 50,000-
foot-long strip of industrial toilet paper. To accomplish their task, they spent one
Sunday afternoon in the “Infinite Corridor” at MIT, an 825-foot hallway.
Gallivan's true achievement was not the setting of a new paper-folding record
but the realization that there exists a mathematical folding limit and then
deriving an equation for this limit. In figure 8.2, we can see why a sheet of paper
can be folded only a certain number of times. In each fold, part of the previous
layers will form a rounded edge, and this edge gets bigger with each additional
folding. Thus, considering single-direction folding as in figure 8.2, the length of
the folded section (where all layers are parallel to each other) will be less than
half the length of the previous folded section, since the rounded edge takes up
some space. Initially, this curved region is hardly recognizable, but with each
additional folding, it will require a larger portion of the volume of the paper (the
total volume of the paper does not change). At some point, the length of the
folded section will be shorter than what would be needed to create another
rounded edge, implying that we cannot double the layers anymore. This means
we have reached the folding limit. The thicker the paper, the smaller is the
folding limit. (For example, when you fold a hand towel, you will experience

this limit after a few folds.) To calculate the folding limit, we only need to find
out how much of the paper is bent to a curve in each fold. Denoting the thickness
of the paper by t and approximating the curved edges as semicircles of length
nπt, we can compute the length of the paper that gets bent in each fold. Figure
8.3 shows the additional length that is “lost” in each fold:
Figure 8.3.
After n folds, the total length of the curved section is therefore
πt(1 + (1 + 2) + (1 + 2 + 3 + 4) + (1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 + 8) +…+ (1 +
2 +…+ 2n–1)).
In each of the terms in parentheses, we add up all numbers from 1 to some
power of 2, which we may write symbolically as 1 +…+ 2k–1 (k represents the
number of the fold). Since the difference between consecutive summands (which
are the numbers being added) is constant (which is called an arithmetic
progression), the arithmetic mean of the numbers to be added is 
 (we add the
smallest and the largest summand and then halve the result). Multiplying the
arithmetic mean by the number of terms being added (2k–1), we obtain a shortcut
for the sum, namely, 1 +…+ 2k–1 = 
 · 2k–1. The latter can also be written as 
 and corresponds to the contribution of the k-th fold. Adding up the
contributions from all folds, from the first fold to the n-th fold, we thus get
We regroup the terms to be added differently to get the following expression:

Here the terms to be added form a geometric progression, meaning that the
ratio between successive terms is constant. We can now use the formula for
finding the sum of a geometric progression, which was presented in high school: 
 where a is the first term of a progression of n terms, and r is the
common ratio between terms. Applying this formula, we find that
