22 + 23 +…+ 2n = 22 · (2n–1 – 1), and 42 + 43 +…+ 4n = 16 · 
.
This implies that the total length of all curved sections is 
which can be simplified to 
This is also the required minimum length of a strip of paper, if we want to fold
it in half n times. The following table shows the minimum length for achieving n
folds, from n = 7 to n = 13, if we assume a paper thickness t = 0.005 inches
(which is a reasonable thickness for standard tissue paper).
Table 8.1.
An interesting observation is that L increases approximately by a factor of 4
with each additional fold, meaning that you would need four times as much
paper as was used in the current record to raise the record by another fold (unless
you find a way to use thinner paper). This is also counterintuitive and contributes
to the difficulty of tackling the record. Take a piece of paper and fold it in half as
often as possible, and you will be surprised how soon you encounter the folding
limit!
BUILDING A SKEWED TOWER
When children are playing with stacking blocks, they will sooner or later try to
create an overhanging stack where the top block protrudes as far as possible over
the bottom block without falling. This is a challenge that comes up quite
naturally, and perhaps you even remember your own trial-and-error experiments
on this problem. During such attempts, an obvious question will arise: What is
the largest possible offset distance that can be achieved between the bottom

block and the top block and not fall, if the blocks are only supported by their
own weight? If we try to analyze this problem mathematically, we have to set up
some rules first. We will begin by assuming that all blocks are identical cuboids
(rectangular solids) with uniform density. Then the center of gravity of each
block coincides with its geometric center. Moreover, we will assume that each
level contains only one block and that each additional block has to be shifted in
the same direction, as we show in figure 8.4.
Figure 8.4.
Is it possible to separate the top block from the bottom block by more than the
length of one block? Most people's intuition would probably indicate no, and the
diagram in figure 8.4 seems to support this belief. Their feeling is that the
skewed tower would collapse as soon as the offset between the top and the
bottom block exceeds the length of one block. This sounds quite reasonable, but,
before exposing whether or not they are right, let us investigate the problem
mathematically, starting with the simplest case of only two blocks and then
adding more and more blocks. For two blocks, the answer is quite clear, both
from an intuitive and from a mathematical viewpoint: The offset between the
upper and the lower block must be less than half the length of a block. Imagine
slowly slipping the upper block to the right until it topples over. This will happen
as soon as its center of gravity passes the edge of the lower block. At that
moment, the combined center of gravity (the average position of all the parts of
the system) of both blocks together is located “in the middle,” that is, at a
horizontal distance of  from the center of gravity of the lower block, if a is the
length of a block (see figure 8.5). The distribution of mass is balanced around
the center of gravity. If both blocks were glued together as shown in figure 8.5
and we would apply a force at the combined the center of gravity, the blocks
would move in the direction of the force without rotating.

Figure 8.5.
If we would now place another block on top of these two blocks, even the
tiniest offset would make the tower collapse, since the third block would then
move the combined center of gravity of the two upper blocks at least slightly to
the right and thus over the edge of the lowest block. Therefore, if we aim to
further increase the overhang by adding more blocks, we should not place the
second block's center of gravity directly on the edge of the first block, but start
with a smaller overhang. When we then add a third block on the top, we must
make sure that the combined center of gravity of the two upper blocks remains
above the base of the tower, that is, the lowest block. Placing block D as we
show in figure 8.6 would already be “on the edge,” since the combined center of
gravity of blocks B, C, and D would project exactly onto the edge of block A.
Figure 8.6.
For any block in the tower, the projection of the combined center of gravity of
all blocks at a higher level must lie inside the surface of this block. This stability
condition must remain satisfied for all blocks in the tower, if we want to add
another block on the top. It is very important to recognize that this condition is
not about the position of the next block on top in relation to the other blocks, but
rather about the position of any block in the stack in relation to all blocks above
it. This suggests looking at the problem of producing maximum overhang quite
differently. Instead of building a tower from bottom to top, we should think of

creating the tower from top to bottom, at least mentally. We start with the
topmost block, slide another block underneath it, and continue this procedure.
With this way of thinking, it is convenient to number the blocks from top to
bottom (block 1 is the topmost block). Let us consider that we already have a
tower of n blocks and we want to slide another block underneath it, thereby
extending the horizontal distance between the topmost and the bottom block as
much as possible. Denoting the horizontal position of the center of gravity of the
existing n-block tower by xn, we place the (n + 1)-th block with its right edge at
xn, measured from the right edge of the topmost block. (See figure 8.7.) Since all
blocks are identical, the center of gravity of the whole stack is the average
position of a block in the stack. It is the arithmetic mean of their centers of
gravity. As we have defined it, the average horizontal coordinate of the first n
blocks is xn. If we place the (n + 1)-th block with its edge at xn, its center of
gravity will be at 
 Hence, the combined center of gravity of all n + 1 blocks
will be at position
since there are n blocks at an average position xn and one block at position 
Thus, adding the (n + 1)-th block to the stack allows us to extend the total
overhang by 
 times half the length of one block. We are now able to answer
the question posed earlier: Is it possible to separate the top block from the
bottom block by more than the length of one block? Placing the edge of the (n +
1)-th block at xn, we get the maximum overhang in each step. Pursuing this
algorithm, the total overhang will exceed the length of one block after only 5
blocks. This is also shown in figure 8.7.
Figure 8.7.
