More generally, after n blocks, the total overhang will be

Here we encounter a partial sum of the famous harmonic series
Although the sum of all reciprocals from 1 to n grows continuously very
slowly with n, it actually has no limit. The harmonic series is divergent, meaning
that it “goes to infinity.” This implies that there is also no limit for the overhang
of a stacked tower of toy blocks or books. However, the number of required
blocks increases exponentially with the size of the desired overhang. For an
overhang that is twice the length of a single block, we would already need 31
layers; for a triple-block overhang, we would have to stack 227 blocks, always
precisely following the algorithm we have described above. Of course, this
becomes quite a challenge for a large number of blocks, and it requires a
considerable amount of patience.
Calculating the center of gravity is also important for building towers in the
real world, especially in modern architecture, where overhanging structures are
frequently used. Finding the center of gravity, called the centroid, of plane
figures such as a rectangle (which is the point of intersection of the diagonals) or
of a triangle (which is the point of intersection of the medians) has been part of
the typical high-school geometry course. However, finding the center of gravity
of an irregular quadrilateral is a bit more complicated. The centroid of a
quadrilateral is that point on which a quadrilateral of uniform density will
balance. This point may be found in the following way. Let M and N be the
centroids of ∆ABC and ∆ADC, respectively. (See figure 8.8.). Let K and L be the
centroids of ∆ABD and ∆BCD, respectively. The point of intersection, G, of MN
and KL is the centroid of the quadrilateral ABCD.

Figure 8.8.
Finding centers of gravity of some figures can be challenging, as you can see
from the above illustration. There is much more mathematics involved in the
structural analysis of buildings. It is surely fair to say that without the great
advances of applied mathematics in the last decades, notably numerical methods
and computational mathematics, many architectural masterpieces could not have
been realized.
WHISPERING GALLERIES
When we whisper, we usually want to limit the audibility of our speech to
nearby listeners. The reason might be to avoid disturbing others in a library, an
auditorium, or a place for worship. Whispering is also used to convey secret
information without being overheard, for example, during a sales meeting or, to
mention a less formal situation, a holiday dinner with weird distant relatives we
have never seen before. Quiet, whispered speech can only be recognized very
close to the whisperer's mouth. The old but still popular “telephone game” is
based on the difficulty of understanding whispered speech and has been played
by children around the world for centuries. However, there are places and
circumstances in which even the slightest whisper can be heard at a great
distance, and, in fact, more distinctively and clearer than a shout.
Rooms with curved and smooth walls can produce a remarkable acoustical
phenomenon known as “whispering gallery waves,” facilitating that faint sounds
can be heard at extraordinary distances. The effect is particularly strong and

demonstrative in large rooms with circular, hemispherical, elliptical, or
ellipsoidal enclosures. National Statuary Hall in the United States Capitol is a
good example. It is a large, two-story, semicircular room beneath a half dome
(see fig. 8.9a). From 1807 to 1857, it was the meeting place of the United States
House of Representatives.
Figure 8.9a. The National Statuary hall inside the United States Capitol.
There is a myth that the sixth president of the United States, John Quincy
Adams (1767–1848), later, as a member of the House of Representatives, took
advantage of the hall's acoustics to eavesdrop on other members of the House of
Representatives conversing quietly on the opposite side of the room. A floor
plaque marks the spot at which Adams's desk on the west side of the hall was
located, so tourists can test the acoustics at the other spot. In some spots, a
speaker many yards away may be heard more clearly than one closer at hand.
Since the half dome, which is in part responsible for the phenomenon, was
installed after John Quincy Adams's death, the eavesdropping story was
probably created for tourists. However, the curious acoustical properties of
Statuary Hall have been documented throughout its history. An August 28, 1892,
article in the New York Times titled “The Echoes of Statuary Hall” speaks of a
“natural telephone” in Statuary Hall: “Away over in the corner you can stand and
whisper, while your friends may be at a similar corner on the opposite side of the
room and hear every syllable as plainly as though you were standing face to
face.” The article also states that no one has been able to explain this remarkable
phenomenon. Yet a simple geometric explanation already could have been found
in the book Phonurgia Nova (1673) by the German Jesuit scholar and polymath
Athanasius Kircher (1602–1680) (see figure 8.9b).

Figure 8.9b.
Sound waves are mechanical waves of pressure and displacement that
propagate through compressible media, such as air or water. When we throw a
stone into a pond, ripples form on the water surface and spread out from the
entry point as growing concentric circles. Analogously, we may think of sound
waves as air-pressure disturbances spreading out from the source as growing
concentric spheres. However, unless the source of sound is rotationally
symmetric, the intensity of the emitted sound waves will vary with direction.
Human speech produces sound waves in the form of concentric spheres whose
energy is concentrated in a forward-directed cone. They can be represented by
rays that are perpendicular to the growing concentric spheres and lie inside this
forward cone. Figure 8.10 shows a diagram drawn by Kircher in which these
“sound rays” are reflected from a ceiling in the shape of an ellipsoid of
revolution (or spheroid), that is, a surface obtained by rotating an ellipse about
one of its principal axes.

Figure 8.10. Schallreflexion in einem Gewölbe, authors: Athanasius Kircher and Tobias Nislen,
artist: Schultes, Friedrich (Drucker), Deutsche Fotothek, 1684.
Sound waves are reflected from surfaces in just the same way as a ball
bounces off a wall. Thus, reflected rays can easily be constructed with a ruler
and protractor. If the heads of the speaker and the listener are located in the foci
of the ceiling spheroid, then all sound waves going upward to the ceiling will be
focused at the listener. The individual reflections can be interpreted as echoes
from the ceiling, all heading directly to the listener. Moreover, the sum of the
distances to the two focal points is the same for all points on an ellipse. This
