characterizing property of an ellipse is illustrated in figure 8.11. To draw an
ellipse, we may push two pins into a sheet of paper to define the foci of the
ellipse and tie a string onto each of the two pins (the string must be significantly
longer than the distance between the foci). Then we take a pen and pull the string
taut to form a triangle together with the segment F1F2. If we now move the pen
while keeping the string taut, the tip of the pen will trace out an ellipse. This
method is called the “gardener's ellipse,” since it is also used by gardeners to
outline elliptical flower beds.

Figure 8.11.
For any two points P and Q on an ellipse with foci F1 and F2, the triangles
F1F2P and F1F2Q have the same perimeter. Thus, all sound waves emanating
from a focal point and going upward to the elliptical ceiling will have traveled
exactly the same total distance when they arrive at the listener, independent of
their initial direction. Hence, all echoes will arrive exactly at the same time (“in
phase”). This focusing and adding up of sound waves emanating from a focal
point of an ellipsoid of revolution makes it possible to hear even the faintest
whispers across a large room.
However, the ceiling of National Statuary Hall is hemispherical and not
elliptical, so there are not two focal points. As shown in figure 8.12 (left side),
the center of the hemisphere is the only focal point, but, if the speaker S stands at
this focal point and directs his or her speech to the ceiling, then all reflections are
focused back to him or her, while the listener L can hardly hear anything. Now
suppose that the speaker moves away from the center, as we show on the right
side of figure 8.12. Then the reflected rays will concentrate around the point that
is symmetric to S with respect to the center of the hemisphere, that is, the point
directly opposite to S on the other side of the center and at the same distance
from it. It is not a true focal point, but the rays become almost focused there.
This “mirror point” would be the ideal position of the listener L. When he comes
close to this point, he will suddenly start to hear the speaker talking. Although
the almost-focusing effect at the ideal spot gets weaker as the speaker moves
farther away from the center (see figure 8.13), there is still a concentration of
sound waves around this point. This explains the occurrence of “whispering
spots” in National Statuary Hall.

Figure 8.12.
Figure 8.13.
The amplification of sound by the focusing of reflected acoustic waves does
not require a room with a curved wall or ceiling. Using two parabolic reflectors
positioned opposite to each other, you can set up an acoustic communication
channel outdoors (see the section “Looking inside a Flashlight,” later, for the
focusing property of a parabolic reflector). We show a schematic drawing in
figure 8.14. Sound waves emanating from focal point F1 and directed to reflector
1 will be transmitted to reflector 2 and become focused at its focal point, F2.
Even for distances between the two reflectors well over 200 feet, whispered
words can be heard distinctly on the other side.
Figure 8.14.

Before the invention of radar, parabolic sound mirrors were used by military
air defense to detect approaching aircraft. For demonstrational reasons, acoustic
communication channels are still installed in science centers or parks.
A similar effect can be experienced under huge arches with a smooth surface.
There is a whispering arch at Grand Central Station in New York City. It is
located on the way down to the lower concourse, outside the Grand Central
Oyster Bar & Restaurant. The walls and ceiling are made of stone. If there is not
too much background noise, two people standing back to back at opposite ends
of the underpass can talk to each other by whispering toward the sides of the
arch, close to the stone surface. Their conversation cannot be heard anywhere
between them, as the sound seems to “creep” along the curved ceiling. This
cannot be fully explained on the basis of geometry alone, it also requires some
physical understanding of acoustic wave propagation. The location most famous
for this phenomenon is the whispering gallery at St. Paul's Cathedral in London
(see figure 8.15). It is a circular walkway above the crossing of the nave, 112
feet wide and 99 feet above the floor. A whisper against its curved wall will be
audible everywhere along the circumference, even on the other side of the
walkway, more than 100 feet away. Although this is already quite astonishing, it
is remarkable that a shout is actually less effective than a whisper, which adds to
the mysteriousness of the phenomenon.
Figure 8.15. (Image from Wikimedia Creative Commons, author: Femtoquake; licensed under CC
BY-SA 3.0 Unported.)
The English physicist and Nobel laureate John William Strutt (1842–1919),
now better known as Lord Rayleigh, experimented in St. Paul's Cathedral in the

late 1870s to investigate its whispering gallery. He analyzed the problem using
the mathematical description of wave propagation and found an explanation for
this acoustic curiosity. Sound waves proceeding from a source close to the wall
and almost tangential to it will cling to its surface and creep along the
circumference of the gallery without losing much of their intensity. Since the
involved angles are so slight, the sound travels around the wall by successive
reflections along short chords, suffering very little absorption at the hard, smooth
wall (see the schematic drawing in figure 8.16). The energy of the traveling
sound is concentrated in a narrow belt touching the wall. As we move radially
away from the wall, the intensity falls off rapidly. The thickness of the sound
belt depends on the frequency of the waves. The higher the frequency, the
narrower the belt and the smaller the energy loss along the wall. Since whispers
are composed of higher frequencies than normal speech, they are carried farther
along the circumference.
Figure 8.16.
Acoustic waves traveling near the surface of solids are now called Rayleigh
waves and are also produced by earthquakes. They are used in geophysics to
characterize Earth's interior. Thus, Lord Rayleigh's interest in the whispering
gallery at St. Paul's Cathedral and his mathematical analysis of surface waves
also helped us to gain a better understanding of earthquakes and the composition
of the earth. This intriguingly shows the generality of mathematics.
LOOKING INSIDE A FLASHLIGHT

Have you ever wondered why a flashlight with a tiny bulb produces so much
light? The luminosity of the bulb or light emitting diode (LED) is actually not
the most important factor, but the reflecting surface behind the bulb does the
trick. The bulb or LED emits light in random directions, but it is mounted in
