front of a concave mirror that reflects the light outward. However, the exact
shape of the concave mirror is crucial. To get a strong beam of light, we want the
flashlight to emit as much light as possible in the same direction. If the emitted
light rays are almost parallel, then the flashlight will produce a narrow and bright
cone of light. Light whose rays are parallel is called collimated light. Lasers
produce almost perfectly collimated beams. For a flashlight, the ideal shape for
the reflecting surface would be a circular paraboloid, that is, a surface obtained
by revolving a parabola around its axis of symmetry (see figure 8.17).
Figure 8.17.
A reflector in the shape of a circular paraboloid is also called a parabolic
reflector. Before we reveal the geometrical reason for the collimating property of
parabolic reflectors, we ought to briefly recall the definition of a parabola.
A parabola is defined by a fixed straight line d (the directrix), and a fixed
point F not on this line (the focus). The parabola is the set of all points in the
plane (which is defined by d and F) that are equidistant from d and F (see figure
8.18). This means that a point belongs to the parabola if and only if its distance
to the focus F is equal to its distance to the directrix d (recall that the distance of
a point to a line is the length of the perpendicular segment from the line to the
point).

Figure 8.18.
To explore the collimating property of the parabola, we need one more
ingredient. We should recall the law of reflection, which states that the angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of reflection, measured from the normal. The
normal is perpendicular to the surface, or, put another way, perpendicular to the
plane tangent to the surface.
We want to show that the reflection of a light ray starting at the focal point F
of a parabola will be reflected outward and parallel to the symmetry axis.
However, since the law of reflection is symmetrical, this is equivalent to
showing that the reflection of a light ray coming in parallel to the symmetry axis
of the parabola will intersect the focal point F. Let us consider the incident ray
being parallel to the parabola's symmetry axis and hitting the parabola in point P
as we show it in figure 8.19.

Figure 8.19.
We extend the ray to the directrix and denote the point of intersection by Q.
We then draw the tangent to the parabola through P. From our definition of a
parabola, we have PQ = PF, and PR is the altitude of the isosceles triangle QPF.
The angle ∠FPR is therefore congruent to ∠QPR. But ∠QPR = α, since vertical
angles are congruent. Hence, PF indeed represents the direction of the ray
reflected from the parabolic mirror. Since P was an arbitrary point on the
parabola, this must be true for all points on the parabola, meaning that the
reflections of light rays coming in parallel to the symmetry axis will converge at
the focal point F. Equivalently, light rays emitted by a bulb or LED mounted at
the focal point will be reflected outward, parallel to the symmetry axis, as we
show it in figure 8.20. The random light rays emitted by the source are thus
directed into a concentrated beam of light.

Figure 8.20.
This explains why flashlights produce a strong beam of light even though the
light source is relatively weak. Such parabolic reflectors are also used for car
headlights.
The reverse principle is used in solar cookers, where a parabolic mirror
concentrates sunlight on the focal spot. Figure 8.21 shows a solar reflector with a
frame for the pot or pan, mounted in the focal area. There are a hundred ways to
grill a burger, but for sure the most ecologically beneficial one, and also not the
least fancy one, is to put a grill surface at the focal spot of a solar reflector
cooker. Moreover, on the Internet you can find numerous DIY (do-it-yourself)
instructions on how to build a solar cooker from cardboard and aluminum foil.
It's fun, and it works!

Figure 8.21. (Image from Wikimedia Commons, author: Nadya Peek; licensed under CC BY 2.0.)
These mathematic principles can go far beyond cooking burgers. According to
an ancient tale, Archimedes (ca. 287 BCE–ca. 212 BCE) used parabolic mirrors
to burn Roman ships attacking the city of Syracuse in Sicily. This famous
episode in the Second Punic War is captured in a wall painting by Giulio Parigi
(1571–1635), which we show in figure 8.22. It is probably just a legend, since
there is a lot of evidence against the effectiveness of such a weapon. Yet this
does not impair the beauty of the principle and its great significance in many
applications.
Figure 8.22. (Wall painting from the Stanzino delle Matematiche in the Galleria degli Uffizi [Florence,
Italy]. Painted by Giulio Parigi [1571–1635] in the years 1599–1600.)
Satellite dishes represent another application of parabolic reflectors. Like any
other form of electromagnetic radiation, signals from satellite radio stations

become weaker with increasing distance. Since satellite television signals travel
a very long way, approximately 23,000 miles from the emitter to the receiver,
they are attenuated considerably when they arrive at the receiver.
Therefore, it is necessary to collect as much of the electromagnetic radiation
as possible to ensure interference-free transmission. Radio waves hitting the dish
parallel to its axis are reflected to the focal point, where a so-called feed horn
converts the signal into electrical currents, which are then transmitted to the
satellite receiver. The feed horn is the actual antenna, whereas the much larger
dish is only there to collect more radiation and direct it to the feed horn. The
parabolic satellite dish acts as geometric amplifier for the radio waves received
from the satellite.
The focusing and collimating property of the parabola was probably first
proved by the Greek mathematician Diocles (ca. 240 BCE–ca. 180 BCE) in his
book On Burning Mirrors.2 The fact that parabolic reflectors are still widely
used in many applications today demonstrates both the power and timelessness
of mathematical knowledge.
COFFEE WITH CAUSTICS
Perhaps you may have noticed that light reflected from the inside of a ceramic
coffee mug sometimes bunches up in a cusped curve on the bottom of the mug.
A similar phenomenon occurs when light shines through a drinking glass. The
glass will produce curved regions of bright light, with cusps appearing inside the
shadow that is cast by the glass. Bright patterns of light can also be observed on
the bottom of a swimming pool, when light falls on a rippled water surface. In
figure 8.23, we show examples of these phenomena.
Figure 8.23. (Fig. 8.23b from Wikimedia Creative Commons, author: Heiner Otterstedt; licensed under
