CC BY-SA 3.0 Unported.)
Such concentrations of light are called caustics, from the Latin word for
“burning,” causticus, which is itself derived from the Greek καυστός (caustos),
meaning “burnt.” Caustics are formed when light is reflected or refracted by a
curved surface.

When light hits curved glass or a curved surface of water, light rays entering
the medium are bent and become focused in certain points or directions. Curved
glass or water acts like a magnifying lens. Similarly, when light rays are
reflected from the inside of a coffee mug, the curved ceramic wall behaves like a
curved mirror that reflects and focuses incident rays. However, the reflected rays
are usually not focused in a single point, but instead they get concentrated in a
caustic surface, where the density of light will be very high. The caustic curve
we can see on the bottom of a coffee mug is the intersection of this surface with
the bottom of the mug. To become visible, the concentrated light needs a
reflective screen. If there is coffee or tea in the mug, the caustics will be hardly
recognizable. However, adding some milk will increase the reflectivity of the
liquid surface, thereby making the caustic visible. Again, the curve of bright
light we would see on the liquid surface is just the intersection of the caustic
surface with the liquid surface.
Although caustics occur under much more general circumstances, let us
consider a simplified situation to understand the geometric basis of the formation
of a caustic. We will assume that the mug is a circular cylinder and that light
shines into the mug from the side (to achieve this, we would have to cut the mug
in half, but this shall not concern us now). Moreover, we will assume that the
incident light rays are all parallel to each other. This is justified if the source of
light is far enough away from the mug. We can then reduce the problem to a
two-dimensional picture as we show it in figure 8.24.
Figure 8.24.
Here, the circle represents the coffee mug and light rays are coming from the
right. When a light ray hits the circle from the inside, it will be reflected. Light

bounces off circular surfaces at the same angle in which it enters. To find the
reflection of a light ray hitting the circle at point P, we first have to draw the
tangent to the circle at P. The angle of incidence is equal to the angle of
reflection; hence, we can then easily construct the reflected ray. If we do this for
a bunch of parallel rays, we get a picture as we show it in figure 8.25.
Figure 8.25.
The more rays we draw, the clearer the picture would get. However, we can
already anticipate the shape of the emerging caustic. It is the curve to which each
of the reflected light rays is tangent. This curve resembles the pattern of light on
the bottom of the coffee mug shown in figure 8.23.
Our geometric model explains the formation of caustics, but the caustic
emerging in the idealized situation we have shown in figure 8.25 is actually a
very special curve. It is a special case of an epicycloid, a curve that is produced
by tracing a point of a circle rolling without slippage around another circle
(recall our earlier discussion about Spirograph toys). Two examples of such
curves are shown in figure 8.26, and these two even have their own names. If
both circles have the same diameter, we obtain a so-called cardioid. Its name is
derived from the Greek word for “heart” and refers to its vaguely heart-shaped
appearance. A cardioid would be traced by a point on the rim of a coin that is
rolled around another, stationary coin. If the outer circle has only half the
diameter of the inner circle, then the generated epicycloid is called a nephroid,
which basically means “kidney-shaped.” A nephroid would be traced by a point
on the rim of a penny rolling around a silver dollar. This is because a silver
dollar has exactly twice the diameter of a penny (38.1 mm vs. 19.05 mm).

Figure 8.26.
The caustic curve emerging in the geometric construction in figure 8.25 is
exactly one-half of a nephroid. A perfect cardioid would arise if the light source
were located on the circle. If the light source would be at some finite distance
from the circle, we would obtain a caustic curve that is something “in between”
a cardioid and a nephroid. Of course, not all of the simplifying assumptions we
have made are justified. Light falling into a cup of coffee will typically come
from above than from the side, and the shape of the mug will not always be
cylindrical. Analyzing these more-realistic situations geometrically would be
more complicated, but the appearance of the arising caustic curves would not
differ very much from the idealized curves shown in figure 8.26. In particular,
they would also display a sharp cusp, which is a typical feature of caustic curves.
In figure 8.27 we show three differently shaped mugs that were illuminated by
table lamps. In the picture on the left, the caustic curve is a cardioid. A cardioid
arises if the cup is roughly a frustum (the remainder when the tip of a cone is cut
off, and where the diameter at its bottom is smaller than at its top) and the light
shines at an angle equal to the angle of the slant height of the cone (parallel to
it). The picture in the middle shows a cylindrical mug and half of a full nephroid
at its bottom. In the picture on the right, two light sources were placed
symmetrically around the mug to produce a complete nephroid.
Figure 8.27.
The next time you prepare coffee or tea, you can use the time it takes the

water to boil for a little experiment. Take a mug with a smooth ceramic finish
(white mugs work best) and place it under a lamp or where sunlight can shine
into it (you may also use a flashlight). By varying the inclination of the mug in
relation to the light source, you will observe various caustic curves resembling
those shown in figure 8.27. Using several light sources, you will be able to
generate caustics with several cusps. Now that you know how these patterns
come about and how they are related to epicycloids, you will look at them with
different eyes.
GREEN TRAFFIC LIGHTS ALL THE WAY
If you live in a city with a good public transport system, you don't really need a
car. However, as daily traffic jams on the main roads of many cities throughout
the world would indicate, not everyone agrees with that. Of course, even in an
urban environment, there can be circumstances in which traveling by car is the
only option. On these occasions, traffic signals can be a nuisance to car drivers
who are in a hurry. When you are late for an appointment and the traffic lights
turn red as you approach each intersection, you might start to believe that these
devices are conspiring against you. Yet, sometimes the opposite occurs as well,
albeit usually not accompanied by comparably strong but positive emotions. You
may have experienced driving on a major thoroughfare and, without any
interruption, comfortably passing intersection after intersection with a green
