light. However, this is not just a matter of luck. Successive traffic lights are often
synchronized to ensure a better flow of traffic. In fact, the main purpose of traffic
lights is to improve the efficiency of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
Imagine tight city traffic without any traffic signals! Well, this was the situation
in most cities at the beginning of the last century, after which the first
automobiles appeared and soon flooded the streets. The Ford Model T, the first
affordable automobile, was produced between 1908 and 1927. With 16.5 million
units sold, it is still one of the most sold cars of all time. In those early days of
motorized private transport, traffic management couldn't keep up with the
onslaught of cars. Before the installation of traffic signals in New York City, it
could take drivers on Fifth Avenue almost 45 minutes to travel the mile and a
quarter between 34th and 59th Streets.3 The chaotic flow of traffic made it
necessary to stop at each intersection, and the lack of organization and control of
traffic flows led to almost permanent congestion on workdays. Since automatic
traffic signals had not yet been invented, traffic flows at busy intersections had to
be controlled by police officers, but the traffic police were not able to deal with

the rapidly increasing number of vehicles. The first traffic lights were installed in
London in 1868, in reaction to an overflow of horse-drawn traffic near the
Houses of Parliament. These signal devices were realized as semaphore arms (an
apparatus for signaling with arms or flags) that extended horizontally from a 22-
foot-high pillar, with additional red and green gas lamps on top of the pillar for
nighttime use (see fig. 8.28). A police constable had to lift and lower the
semaphore arms and turn the lamps with a lever so that the appropriate light
faced the traffic. In the first two decades of the twentieth century, semaphore
traffic signals similar to the one in London were in use throughout the United
States. The first three-color traffic light appeared in Detroit in 1920, on one of
the busiest intersections in the world. The third light was colored amber, and its
purpose was to give police officers a few seconds of time to better coordinate the
change from red to green and green to red, respectively. In the 1920s, traffic
signals were beginning to be controlled by automatic timers. This was a crucial
step in traffic control that led to a dramatic increase of traffic lights. By 1926,
New York City had about 100 traffic lights, which were controlled by police
officers, and by 1929—merely three years later—the city had more than 3,500
automatic traffic lights. Although the cost of installation was significant, the
automated lights enabled the city to reduce the number of police officers in the
traffic squad from 6,000 to 500.
Figure 8.28. Left: Semaphore traffic signals in London, 1868. Right: traffic power in Detroit, 1920.
When the first automatic traffic lights were installed, all lights on an avenue
turned green simultaneously. As a foreseeable consequence, cars raced to get
through as many green lights as they could before all lights turned red. This
produced accidents, and pedestrians were often the ones who suffered as a result
of these speeding vehicles. It soon became clear that it is better to coordinate

successive traffic signals in such a way that platoons of vehicles can proceed
uninterrupted through a series of green lights. This not only improved safety but
also ensured a better flow of traffic and minimized gas consumption and
pollutant emissions. With the idea of optimizing traffic-signal coordination,
mathematics enters into the game. Finding the optimal timing pattern of traffic
lights at successive intersections is essentially a mathematical problem. For
simplicity, we will assume that we have a sequence of intersections where the
distance d between two successive intersections is always the same. Each
intersection is equipped with identical traffic lights, in particular, the cycle
duration T and the phases within a cycle (green, yellow, red) are the same for all
intersections. Now assume that a car gets through the first intersection just after
the lights switched to green. Depending on its average speed v, the car will need
a time 
 to get to the next intersection. Therefore, if we want the green phase
at the second intersection to start just as the car arrives, we have to shift the
traffic signal cycle at the second intersection exactly by a time lag 
 In fact, if
we assume that the average speed of the car is constant, the traffic signal cycle
must always be shifted by this amount, when we go from one intersection to the
next. In a snapshot showing the phases of successive traffic lights at a certain
moment in time, we will thus get a periodic pattern as shown in figure 8.29. We
may think of this pattern as a wave whose wavelength is equal to the (spatial)
distance between two intersections whose traffic lights are (always) in the same
phase. For instance, in figure 8.29 the third and the tenth traffic light are
completely synchronized, hence the wavelength is equal to the distance between
the second and the tenth intersection.
Figure 8.29.
In figure 8.29, the first two traffic lights on the left are in the green phase. The
third traffic light from the left is in the red phase, but it will soon switch to green.
The sixth traffic light is in the yellow phase, meaning that it will soon switch to
red. Recall that the duration of a cycle is T. This means that a snapshot taken a
time T later will look exactly the same as the one shown in figure 8.29. However,
if we take another snapshot after a time interval that is only a fraction of T, the

picture will look different. Figure 8.30 shows snapshots at different times within
one cycle, and we can see that the pattern we called a wave actually travels from
left to right as time proceeds.
Figure 8.30.
In fact, this is the true reason why traffic lights coordinated in this way are
sometimes also called a “green wave.” Waves are essentially patterns that
propagate, and so does the pattern of traffic signals in figure 8.30. As time
passes, it propagates from left to right. More precisely, as can also be inferred
from figure 8.30, the wave travels exactly one wavelength L during each signal
cycle of duration T. The speed of the wave is therefore  and for a car traveling
at exactly the same speed, green lights will cascade one after the other. The
speed of the traffic signal wave can be adjusted by means of the time lag
between the signal cycles at two successive intersections. The smaller the time

lag, the faster the wave will propagate. If we want to allow platoons of vehicles
to proceed through a series of green lights, we have to adjust the time lag ∆t to
the expected average vehicle speed v and the intersection spacing d. The
condition 
 ensures that cars getting through a particular intersection during
the green phase will also get a green light at the following intersection, provided
they maintain the optimum speed v, which is usually chosen to be slightly below
the speed limit. Moving with constant speed 
