 means traveling along with
the wave, quite similar to surfing on water waves. Cars moving slower or faster
than v will run out of phase with the wave, and, therefore, will encounter a red
light sooner or later.
The first coordination of traffic lights implementing this scheme was realized
in Salt Lake City in 1917, where the manually controlled signal cycles at six
successive intersections were coordinated to allow for a smooth flow of traffic.
In modern coordinated signal systems, it is possible for drivers to travel long
distances before encountering a red light, typically at times when there is less
traffic, since even a very short traffic holdup will decrease the average speed and
bring you out of phase with the traffic signal wave. However, any coordination is
futile during traffic congestion. Moreover, traffic signals can also be coordinated
“against drivers,” that is to intentionally slow down traffic; for instance, to
prevent high volumes of traffic at bottlenecks and reduce the risk of congestion.
The principle of traffic signal coordination can be illustrated very nicely by
using a representation also known as a space-time diagram (see fig. 8.31). Here
the time axis is drawn upward and the horizontal line represents the spatial
distance from the origin. The curves drawn in a space-time diagram are referred
to as “world-lines.” For example, the world-line of a car at rest is represented by
a vertical line in the diagram, parallel to the time axis, since the spatial position
of the car does not change with time. The world-line of a car moving at constant
speed v > 0 is a straight line with slope 
 that is, the higher the speed, the
more the world-line will be tilted toward the horizontal direction. A horizontal
world-line would mean infinite speed, which is not possible by the laws of
physics, since nothing can travel faster than the speed of light. The shaded
regions in figure 8.31 represent the red phases of the corresponding
intersections, drawn schematically below the horizontal axis. Thus, the world-
line of a car that passes through an intersection during the green phase will run
between two consecutive shaded rectangles at the position of this intersection. If
the world-line of a car runs into a shaded rectangle, the car must stop because it
reaches the intersection during the red phase. While the driver waits for the
lights to turn green again, the world-line of the car goes on vertically, meaning
that time passes, but the car is at rest. As the diagram demonstrates, the fixed

time lag between the signal cycles of successive interactions corresponds to a
vertical shift of the shaded rectangles from intersection to intersection, allowing
cars with the right speed to encounter a cascade of green lights and pass
smoothly through a series of intersections.
Figure 8.31.
The diagram in figure 8.31 also shows that the coordination of traffic signals
for one direction will in general have the opposite effect on traffic flowing in the
other direction. The world-line of a car moving at a normal speed from right to
left will inevitably run into a red-light region at every second intersection (see
fig. 8.31). Hence, traffic signal coordination does not work for both directions on
two-way streets. However, many cities in the United States use traffic signal
coordination also on two-way streets, operating in the direction more heavily
traveled. This direction may change during the day. For example, many
commuters travel from the suburbs to the city in the morning, but in the opposite
direction after work. Therefore, the lights are timed to accommodate the rush-
hour traffic's direction. For example, in New York City there are a number of
such two-way streets that accommodate rush-hour traffic, such as Riverside
Drive and Central Park West in Manhattan.
We have only touched upon some mathematical aspects of traffic signal
coordination, which is much more complex in reality. Signal cycles may be
different at different intersections and vary during the day, depending on cross
traffic. In addition, waiting times for pedestrians to finish crossing the street
have to be considered, and many other factors have to be taken into account as
well. Nowadays, computerized control and coordination systems enable traffic

flow organization to react almost instantaneously to critical traffic situations and
automatically adjust traffic signal cycles to minimize delay. All of these systems
rely on mathematics, and finding the optimal solution basically means to solve a
complicated system of equations, much more complicated than the simple
example just discussed.
SAFETY IN NUMBERS
When you were a child, you may have exchanged secret messages with a friend
by using some sort of secret code. One primitive example of a code is mirror
writing. The message will look very strange at first sight, and an uninitiated
reader may conclude that it must have been written in a foreign language.
However, if writing in a reverse direction is perfectly executed, then the message
will appear completely normal when it is reflected in a mirror. Interestingly,
Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) wrote most of his personal notes in mirror style,
for example, the notes on his famous Vitruvian Man, part of which are
highlighted in figure 8.32.

Figure 8.32.
Although there exist various speculations, it is not really known why he wrote
this way. Mirror writing is not a very effective way to prevent somebody else
from reading a message, yet it will at least considerably slow down one's
reading, unless, of course, a mirror can be used to reflect the message. Some
other reasons have been suggested, for instance, the fact that Leonardo probably
was left-handed might have motivated him to write from right to left to avoid
smudging the ink with his hand.
A famous historical person who used a code to protect secret messages was
Julius Caesar (100 BCE–44 BCE). The technique he used is now known as
“Caesar's code” or “Caesar's cipher.” A cipher is an algorithm to convert
information into a code, which is where the word decipher comes from. We will
explain the Caesar cipher in a moment, but let us first introduce some terms used

in cryptography, which is the study and practice of secure communication. The
word cryptography stems from the Greek words kryptós for “secret” and
graphein for “writing”; thus, it literally translates to “secret writing.” The
information in its original form is known as plaintext. Applying the cipher
algorithm, it can be encrypted or encoded, which is to convert written material
into a form that can only be accessed by authorized parties who are familiar with
the code. This encrypted message is also known as ciphertext. An authorized
person can “undo” the encryption, a process called decryption, with the help of a
so-called key, which specifies the transformation of plaintext into ciphertext.
So how does the Caesar cipher work? Each letter in the plaintext is replaced
