The Diffie-Hellman-Merkle key exchange and similar methods based on the
virtual impossibility of solving certain mathematical problems are used for
secure data transfer in a variety of internet services. Secure online payment
systems, which we frequently use, would not be possible without the
mathematical concepts underlying modern cryptography. Here we see how
mathematics can help to keep us secure!
THE ISBN SYSTEM
On the back cover of this book, you find a bar code representing the ISBN of
this book, that is, its International Standard Book Number. The ISBN system

was developed by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and
was published in 1970 as the international standard ISO 2108. It was based on
the Standard Book Number (SBN) system, which had already been in use in the
United Kingdom since 1967.6 Before the ISBN system was introduced, one had
to go through the title, publisher, and year of publication to identify a particular
edition of a book. The ISBN system considerably simplified the search for a
specific printing of a book and facilitated the use of electronic order transmission
systems, which became widespread in book trade in the 1970s. A worldwide
numbering scheme for books was also essential for bibliographic records in
electronic form, paving the way for electronic databases in libraries and
bestseller lists. Each edition of a book has a specific ISBN code. For example, an
ebook, a paperback, and a hardcover edition of the same book would each have a
separate ISBN. The ISBN codes assigned in 2007 or later are 13 digits long, and
they are 10 digits long if they were assigned before 2007. It is a “structured”
number—meaning that different parts of the number have different meanings
(similar to ZIP codes). The parts of an ISBN are usually separated by hyphens.
Any 10-digit ISBN can be converted into a 13-digit ISBN. In fact, the 9 digits
before the last one are identical in both variants. Apart from a different last digit,
the ISBN-13 only has an additional 3-digit prefix to make the ISBN code
compatible with the 13-digit international article number system EAN-13, which
has already been used for products other than books. You will find EAN
barcodes on all sorts of products in your local supermarket. EAN-13 codes start
with a 3-digit country prefix, but all ISBN-13 codes start with “978,” regardless
of the country of origin. The universal country code “978” is, therefore,
informally known as “Bookland.” For example, the first edition of this book
(hardcover version) has the ISBN 978-1-63388-387-1. The prefix “978” is
followed by a “registration group element” indicating the country, geographical
area, or language (“1” represents English), which is then followed by a
“registrant element” exactly identifying the publishing house and its address, and
then a “publication element” identifying the specific publication of that
registrant. The last digit is a so-called check digit, and this is where mathematics
enters into the game.
A check digit, usually appended at the end of a number code, is calculated
from the previous digits in the code. It does not contain any additional
information. Its role is merely to detect errors in the preceding digits. Errors
mostly occur when numbers are typed or written down on paper and put into a
computer manually. Check digits enable computers to detect such errors
immediately. Imagine you have found a several-years-old special edition of a
certain book in the town library, and you would like to purchase it to get your

own copy. You write down its ISBN and go to a bookstore to find out whether it
is still available. Unfortunately, you got one of the digits wrong, which you
didn't notice. However, as soon as your bookseller enters the number written on
your note into his ISBN search engine, he will tell you that this is not a valid
ISBN and that you must have made a mistake. The two most common errors in
handling an ISBN are a single altered digit or the transposition of two adjacent
digits. The check digit methods of ISBN-10 and ISBN-13 ensure that a wrong
number arising from the alteration of a single digit of a valid number will always
be detected. In addition, the ISBN-10 check digit method also allows us to
identify any wrong number arising from the transposition of two adjacent digits,
while the ISBN-13 check digit does not catch all errors of this kind.
How does the check digit method work? The check digit appended at the end
of an identifying number (which could be an ISBN, a bank account number, or
an order or customer number), is calculated from the preceding numbers by a
mathematical formula. This formula is chosen in a way that the obtained result,
that is, the check digit, will be definitely different if one of the preceding digits is
altered. Of course, this would, for example, be true for the sum of all the
preceding digits. However, since the check digit is only a single digit, we cannot
simply take the sum of all the preceding digits. The formula uses the modulo
operation, which we introduced in the previous section, “Safety in Numbers.” So
how does this work?
Let us first look at the calculation of the ISBN-10 check digit. Consider the
nine-digit number 1-63388-387, obtained from the ISBN-13 of this book by
deleting the first three digits (the “prefix element”) as well as the last digit. If
this remaining number were to represent the first nine digits of an ISBN-10, then
its tenth digit, the check digit, would be calculated as follows: First, multiply the
first digit by 10, the second digit by 9, the third digit by 8,…, the ninth digit by
2, and add up all these numbers:
10 · 1 + 9 · 6 + 8 · 3 + 7 · 3 + 6 · 8 + 5 · 8 + 4 · 3 + 3 · 8 + 2 · 7 = 247
This is called a weighted sum (the descending sequence 10, 9, 8,…, 2 are the
weights of the digits). The check digit is the smallest number you have to add to
this weighted sum to get a multiple of 11: 247 + 6 = 23 · 11, hence the check
digit is 6. With the help of the modulo operation, we can write this as 11 – 247
mod 11 = 6, that is, we get the check digit by subtracting the weighted sum
modulo 11 from 11. Note that the result must always be a number from 0 to 10
(since we are calculating up to multiples of 11). It cannot be larger than 10, but
what would the check digit be if the result would have been 10? In this case, you

would write “X” in the check digit place, which could be interpreted as the
roman symbol for 10 (see the section on roman numerals earlier in this book).
Thus, the check digit in the ISBN-10 system can be any symbol from the set {0,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, X}, where “X” represents “10.” The correct ISBN-10
code for this book is therefore 1-63388-387-6, and the last digit is the ISBN-10
check digit we have just calculated. Assume now that we alter one of the other
digits, writing p instead of q. Then the weighted sum of the first nine digits
would change by an amount (11 – k) (p – q), where k is the position of the
altered digit. Is it possible to obtain the same value for the check digit? The
check digit would only stay the same if (11 – k) (p – q) were a multiple of 11,
meaning that k (p – q) would have to be a multiple of 11 or that k(p – q) = 11 · n
for some integer n. But this is impossible, since 11 is a prime number and cannot
