be decomposed into smaller factors. The equality k(p – q) = 11 · n would imply
that 11 is a divisor of k or of p – q. But k ranges from 0 to 9 and p – q ranges
from –9 to 9. Therefore, neither of them is divisible by 11. Consequently, the
value of the check digit must change as soon as we alter one of the first 9 digits.
What happens if we switch two adjacent digits within the first 9 digits? This is
called a “transposition error.” Assume that the correct number has digit p at
position k, and digit q at position k + 1. Exchanging p and q would change the
value of the k-th term in the weighted sum by (11 – k)(q – p) and the value of the
k + 1-th term by (11 – (k + 1))(p – q). In total, the change would be: (11 – k)(q –
p) – (11 – (k + 1))(q – p).
Again, we may ask ourselves, “Is it possible that this expression is a multiple
of 11”? The answer is clearly no, because the total change is actually equal to q –
p (we encourage you to verify this), which ranges from –9 to 9 and therefore
cannot be divisible by 11.
Our considerations have shown that if we compare the last digit of an ISBN-
10 with the check digit we have calculated from its first 9 digits, we are able to
detect all single transposition errors and all single-digit alterations.
Let us also take a look at the ISBN-13 now. Here the check digit is calculated
in a slightly different way. Again, one computes a weighted sum from the first
12 digits, but one alternately assigns the weights 1 and 3 to the digits, starting
with 1. Let us check whether the check digit of the ISBN-13 of this book is
correct. The first 12 digits are 978-1-63388-387, so we get:
1∙9 + 3∙7 + 1∙8 + 3∙1 + 1∙6 + 3∙3 + 1∙3 + 3∙8 + 1∙8 + 3∙3 + 1∙8 + 3∙7 = 129.
The check digit of the ISBN-13 system is the smallest number you have to add
to this sum to get a multiple of 10: 129 + 1 = 13∙10, hence the check digit is

indeed 1. Altering one of the digits from q to p will change the value of the
weighted sum by (p – q) or 3(p – q). Clearly, p–q cannot be a multiple of 10.
Since the expression 3(p – q) must be some multiple of 3 between –27 and 27, it
cannot be a multiple of 10 either. Since any alteration of a single digit will render
the value of the total sum by an amount that is not divisible by 10, the value of
the check digit will change as well. Thus the ISBN-13 check digit method
ensures that single-digit alterations can be detected. However, if two adjacent
digits are switched, the weighted sum in the ISBN-13 system will change by ±
((p – q) + 3(q – p)) = ±2(q – p). Unfortunately, the expression ±2(q – p) can
happen to be a multiple of 10. This is the case whenever the difference between
the two adjacent digits that are switched is equal to ±5, for example, if p = 7 and
q = 2, or if p = 0 and q = 5.
Thus, in contrast to the old ISBN-10 system, the ISBN-13 check digit method
cannot catch all transposition errors of adjacent digits. On the other hand, times
have changed and typing errors are not such a big problem anymore. Librarians
use barcode scanners to read ISBN codes into the computer, and data transfer
between publishers to bookstores is not dependent on paper at all, it is fully
electronic.
In the late 1960s, when the ISBN system was developed, computers were just
starting to be used for business purposes, and only for certain steps of the whole
workflow. Numbers were still put into the computer by humans, and humans
make a lot of mistakes. In fact, the most common typing mistake that humans
make is switching two adjacent digits in a number, the aforementioned
transposition error. The idea of using a check digit came about to help find such
errors.
HOW THE GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM (GPS) WORKS
The Global Positioning System (GPS) has changed our lives. Navigating a car in
an unfamiliar part of town or in a foreign country is not a challenge anymore;
you just have to turn on your GPS device, enter your desired destination, and
then follow the instructions. In fact, more and more people seem to prefer letting
an electronic device figure out the route rather than using old-fashioned maps or
activating their memory—even if it's just a short trip for which it would be fairly
easy to find the way simply by being willing to read road signs. It is not
surprising that parallel to the proliferation of smartphones with GPS technology
over the last decade, sales of printed maps have been in rapid decline.
Undoubtedly, satellite navigation has made our lives easier. However, there may

be some adverse effects as well. You may have noticed while using computer
navigation that although it is useful to get from one place to another, it makes it
harder to remember where you've been or how you got there. Scientific studies
have shown that this sort of navigation is a use-it-or-lose-it skill.7 Thus, over-
reliance on GPS technology could lead to a deterioration of our natural
navigation abilities. Moreover, the way in which we typically use GPS
navigation distinguishes this technology from other technologies that have
become an integral part of our lives. When we obediently follow every
command dictated by the automated voice in our navigation system, we
reinforce the increasing dependence of our society on computers and artificial
intelligence in its most direct form, and perhaps also in its most embarrassing
form. Here it becomes blatantly visible that we are not always in control of
technology, but, more often, technology controls us. GPS navigation works so
well that some drivers start to have more faith in their GPS navigation systems
than they do trust their own eyes. They blindly follow the directions, without any
doubt or question, even if those instructions were to direct us into a lake, down a
cliff, or straight into a house.8 No technology is infallible; mistakes will always
occur. This should not come as a surprise, yet some drivers still seem to switch
off their brains as soon as they switch on their GPS navigators. When drivers are
in this state of mind, typos within the GPS navigation can be fatal. A pinch of
common sense should suffice to help you realize that there might be something
wrong when you have already driven hundreds of miles, directed by your
navigation system, but all you wanted was to get from the airport to your nearby
hotel. Epic detours and other disasters resulting from too much faith in GPS
navigation combined with impressive resilience against common sense are
reported in the media almost every week. However, in spite of such amusing
mishaps, the Global Positioning System remains an extremely useful technology.
As with most technologies developed in the twentieth century, the GPS
involves a lot of mathematics. A comprehensive description of all mathematical
methods that are applied to reach the remarkable accuracy of this system would
go far beyond the scope of this book, but the basic mathematical concepts
underlying satellite navigation are actually very simple. We will try to reveal
these essential ideas without going into the details of the algorithm that is used to
compute the position from the received data. Although the mathematical
methods that are necessary to fully understand the computation algorithm do not
require much more than high-school mathematics, the formulas involved would
only distract from the fundamental ideas and make everything appear more
