complicated than it actually is, without providing any further significant insights.

Figure 8.38. (Image from GPS.gov.)
The Global Positioning System (GPS) is operated by the United States Air
Force and uses a constellation of (at least) twenty-four satellites, each in its own
orbit 11,000 nautical miles9 (approximately 20,500 kilometers or 12,500 miles)
above the earth. The constellation comprises six equally-spaced orbital planes
surrounding the earth, where each plane contains the orbits of four satellites (see
fig. 8.38). This arrangement ensures that from any point on the planet, at any
time, at least four satellites can be viewed. Each satellite permanently broadcasts
messages in regular time intervals. These messages are transmitted as
microwave signals and contain information enabling a GPS receiver on, or near,
the earth's surface to calculate its distance to the satellite and the position of the
satellite with respect to the earth.
Each message contains a code identifying the satellite, information about its
exact orbit (data called ephemeris), and the precise time at which the signal has
been emitted. The transmitted data enable the receiver to precisely calculate the
current position of the satellite. However, the most important part of the message
is the time stamp, measured by clocks onboard the satellite. The distance
between the satellite and the receiver can be computed by comparing the time of
arrival of the message with its time of emission, since the signal always travels
at the same speed, the speed of light, which is approximately 300,000 kilometers
per second (or 186,000 miles per second). The time delay between emission and
receipt of the signal multiplied by the speed of light gives us the distance of the
satellite at the time of emission, which is in very good approximation of the
position of the satellite at the time of receipt. Since the satellite moves much

slower than the speed of light, its position doesn't change significantly during the
signal's traveling time (it takes the signal only a small fraction of a second to
travel from the satellite to the receiver).
Incidentally, the same principle can be used to estimate the distance of a
nearby thunderstorm by counting the seconds that pass between a flash of
lightning and the thunder. The flash of light from the lightning and the sound of
thunder are created at the same place and time, but sound travels about one
kilometer every three seconds (or one mile every five seconds), which is again
much, much slower than the speed of light. That's why we first see the lightning
and then hear the thunder afterwards. The sound requires more time to reach us.
The farther away we are from the thunderstorm, the longer the delay between
light and sound. To calculate your distance from the lightning source, you can
use a stopwatch to determine the time delay between lightning and thunder in
seconds. Dividing the result by 3, or 5, will give you the approximate distance of
the thunderstorm in kilometers or miles, respectively.
Similarly, your GPS device counts the time delay between emission and
receipt of a satellite signal and converts it into a distance by multiplying it by the
speed of light. At any instant in time, the collection of all points with the same
distance d1 to a satellite S1 forms a sphere of radius d1 around this satellite as
shown in figure 8.39. The intersection of this sphere with the surface of the earth
is a circle C1 on the surface of the earth. By receiving the signal from satellite S1
you can, therefore, localize yourself on the circle C1. If your GPS device also
receives a signal from a second satellite S2 and computes the corresponding
distance, d2, you can localize yourself on the intersection of the circles C1 and
C2, where C2 is the intersection of the surface of the earth with a sphere of radius
d2, centered at satellite S2. As you can see in figure 8.39, two satellites are not
sufficient to determine your position uniquely, since two circles on a sphere will
generally have two points of intersection. The signal from a third satellite is
needed to single out one of the two points and obtain your position as the unique
point of intersection of C1, C2, and C3.

Figure 8.39.
Earlier we mentioned that no matter where on the surface of the planet you
are, the special arrangement of the orbits of the twenty-four GPS satellites
ensures that there are always at least four satellites visible. Why are four
satellites needed, when three of them are already sufficient to determine your
location? Recall that the GPS receiver computes the traveling time of a satellite
signal by comparing its time of emission (which is measured by a clock onboard
the satellite and transmitted with the signal) with the time of receipt, which is
measured by a clock built into the GPS receiver. If the clock at the receiver were
perfectly synchronized with the satellite clock, then the difference between
emission in satellite-clock time and receipt in receiver-clock time would indeed
be the true traveling time of the signal. However, since the GPS receiver clock
is, in general, not perfectly synchronized with the satellite clock, the traveling
times computed by the receiver are in error. This is the reason a fourth satellite is
needed. All GPS satellites are equipped with very stable atomic clocks that are
synchronized with one another and to ground clocks. Any drift from true time
maintained on the ground is corrected daily. Because all satellite clocks are
perfectly synchronized, the error in the traveling times as they are computed by
the receiver can be attributed exclusively to the time offset (T0 = TReceiver –
TSatellites) between the receiver clock and the satellite clocks. If c is the speed of
light, then the distances computed by the receiver will deviate from the real
distances by an amount cT0 (which can be positive or negative). To locate a point
in space, you need three “numbers” or three coordinates. To locate a point on
Earth, you have to know its latitude, longitude, and height above sea level. These

are called spherical coordinates, which are very convenient to use, since the
earth is approximately a sphere. An alternative to spherical coordinates are
Cartesian coordinates x, y, and z, which are part of the standard high-school
curriculum. Since the point we are going to make is independent of which
coordinate system we use, we will stick to Cartesian coordinates x, y, and z.
Assume that xk, yk, and zk are the spatial coordinates of satellite Sk (at a certain
time). By using the Pythagorean theorem, we can write the distance between a
point P with coordinates px, py, and pz and the satellite Sk as 
. If the point P is the position of the GPS receiver and
dk are the computed distances to the satellites, which deviate from the real
distances by an offset cT0, then we get the following system of equations:
There are four unknown quantities in these equations, but since we only have
three equations, we do not get a unique solution; that is, we cannot uniquely
determine the values of the unknowns—px, py, pz, and T0—with only the three
equations above. To obtain a unique solution of a system of equations with four
unknowns, we need four equations. That is why a fourth satellite is needed.
Adding the equation
