to the system of equations above, we have four equations with four unknown
quantities. It is exactly this system of equations that your GPS device must solve
to determine your location. It is a nonlinear system for four unknowns, which is
a bit more complicated to solve than the equations we had in high school, so we
shall not distract your attention here by showing how your GPS receiver solves
this system of equations.
There is another interesting aspect of the Global Positioning System we ought
to mention. As you may know from your own experience with GPS devices, the
accuracy of the localization is incredibly high. The calculated position typically
differs by no more than 5 to 10 meters in the horizontal. Given that the speed of
light is approximately 300,000 km per second, this deviation corresponds to a
time span of only about 10 nanoseconds. Thus, to maintain this remarkable

precision, the satellite clocks must keep time with an accuracy of 10
nanoseconds per day (deviations from true time are corrected daily from control
sites on the ground). An accuracy of 10 nanoseconds per day means that the
deviation from true time is only 1 second in 300,000 years. Only atomic clocks
can provide this level of accuracy. Since the mechanism by which atomic clocks
work is an application of quantum physics, the Global Positioning System would
not have been possible without quantum physics. Interestingly, the accuracy of
the GPS also relies on the special and general theories of relativity. The satellites
are constantly moving relative to observers on the earth, and special relativity
predicts that a moving clock is slower than the stationary one, an effect called
time dilation. General relativity predicts that clocks also go slower in a higher
gravitational field. This gravitational effect makes the clock aboard the GPS
satellites click faster than a clock down on Earth. Both effects have to be
considered and, in total, the clocks on a GPS satellite are faster than a clock on
Earth by about 38 microseconds every day, which would be 1,000 times more
than the acceptable deviation. This is not a matter of building still more accurate
clocks, but realizing that time itself goes faster in the satellites. However, since
these effects can be calculated very accurately for a given orbit, they can be
compensated by a correction factor. If these relativistic effects were not taken
into account, the GPS would accumulate a localization error of about 11
kilometers per day, rather than its current error of only 5 to 10 meters. It is very
interesting to note that the two most revolutionary physical theories, and perhaps
also the two greatest intellectual achievements of the twentieth century, are both
essential ingredients of the Global Positioning System. It would not exist—or at
least not work—without them. Unfortunately, the involvement of these
masterpieces of science does not prevent people from driving their cars into
lakes or down a cliff, just because their GPS told them to drive in that direction!
Having now journeyed with descriptive numbers in our environment, and
numbers that helped us identify our location and action in our environment, we
comfortably conclude that the reader should now have a rather-comprehensive
feeling as to how mathematics accompanies us and supports us through our daily
lives.

A book of this complexity requires very capable editorial management and
copyediting. We wish to thank Catherine Roberts-Abel for very capably
managing the production of this book, and offer very special thanks to Jade Zora
Scibilia for truly outstanding editing throughout the various phases of
production. We also thank Hanna Etu for her support, which was also much
appreciated. The editor in chief of Prometheus Books, Steven L Mitchell,
deserves praise for enabling us to approach the general readership to expose the
mathematical wonders that help explain our everyday experiences. Christian
Spreitzer would like to thank Dr. Katharina Brazda for contributing ideas and for
her support during the writing of this book.

CHAPTER 1: HISTORICAL HIGH POINTS IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF MATHEMATICAL
APPLICATIONS
 1. Heinrich Weber, “Leopold Kronecker,” Mathematische Zahlen 43, no. 1, Berlin/Heidelberg:
Springer Verlag, pp. 1–25.
 2. Karl Menninger, Number Words and Number Symbols: A Cultural History of Numbers (New York:
Dover Publications, 1992), p. 399. Originally published Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1969.
 3. Robert Kaplan, The Nothing That Is: A Natural History of Zero (London: Allen Lane/Penguin Press
1999), pp. 68–75.
 4. Syamal K. Sen and Ravi P. Agarwal, Zero: A Landmark Discovery, the Dreadful Void, and the
Ultimate Mind (Amsterdam: Academic Press, 2016), p. 6.
 5. Fibonacci used the term “Indian figures” for the Hindu numerals. Laurence Sigler, Fibonacci's
Liber Abaci: A translation into Modern English of Leonardo Pisano's Book of Calculation (New York:
Springer Verlag, 2002).
 6. Lucas N. H. Bunt, Phillip S. Jones, and Jack D. Bedient, The Historical Roots of Elementary
Mathematics (New York: Dover, 1976).
 7. Ibid., chap. II.7.
 8. Paul Erdős,(1950), “Az 1/x1 + 1/x2 +…+ 1/xn = a/b egyenlet egész számú megoldásairól” (“On a
Diophantine Equation”) Mat. Lapok. 1:192–210 (PDF, in Hungarian).
 
9. 
See, 
for 
example, 
Encyclopaedia 
Britannica, 
s.v. 
“Pendulum,”
https://www.britannica.com/technology/pendulum.
10. H. Sully and J. Le Roy, Regle artificielle des tems (Paris: G. Dupuis, 1737), chap. 1, p. 14.
11. 
See, 
for 
example, 
Encyclopaedia 
Britannica, 
s.v. 
“Watch,”
https://www.britannica.com/technology/watch#ref38408.
12. See, for example, J. J. O'Connor and E. F. Robertson, “Decimal Time and Angles,” October 2005,
http://www-history.mcs.st-and.ac.uk/HistTopics/Decimal_time.html.
13. Ibid.
14. 
