Careless People
By Sarah Wynn-Williams

2025
 

For Tom
I’m sorry I dragged you into all this.
&
For my grandmother Eileen
Who regularly reminds us to “live an ordinary life” and
“enjoy the good times.”

They were careless people, Tom and Daisy—they smashed
up things and creatures and then retreated back into their
money or their vast carelessness, or whatever it was that kept
them together, and let other people clean up the mess they
had made.
—F. SCOTT FITZGERALD, THE GREAT GATSBY

Prologue
We’re in the middle of an archeological ruin somewhere on the Panamanian
coast. It’s me, two guys I work with, clusters of people who are basically
naked, and Mark Zuckerberg. Mark is not happy. This is the 2015 Summit
of the Americas, an international meeting of world leaders. This particular
event is a state dinner that—other than Mark—is supposed to be exclusively
heads of state of various countries: Brazil, Colombia, Cuba, Canada, the
US, over thirty other nations. I wrangled Mark an invitation because I’ve
been trying to convince him that he needs to have relationships with these
people.
But somehow we are the only ones at this party.
Under dark skies and low clouds, a red carpet stretches into the distance
in the ruins, dimly lit by the open fires. It’s flanked by guards in ancient
costumes with frilly collars and colorful silk pants, wielding swords and ax-
type things. Plus the naked people, who—on closer inspection—are
seminaked, wearing abbreviated, ancient, flesh-toned costumes. On one
side, a group of people wearing only tiny loincloths and holding crops.
Farther down, people who appear to be dressed as members of a kind of
primeval Ku Klux Klan. All in front of these ancient fortifications, the site
of the oldest European settlement on the Pacific coast of the Americas.
“Why are there naked people at a state dinner?” Mark whispers.
“Honestly,” I say, searching for a reasonable response, “I couldn’t say.
This is my first state dinner with naked people.”
We trudge down the endless red carpet past weird scenes of ritual,
trading, fighting, and who knows what else, the Facebook men I’m with
mostly averting their eyes because of the nakedness. And because any time

you look directly at one of the noncostumed extras, they meet your eyes and
stare back at you. It’s unnerving.
When we get to the empty dining area, I see who’s sitting where and it’s
dreadful. Because he isn’t a head of state, Mark is assigned a table between
two people who seem to be random relatives of the president of Panama. I
mean, they might also have been ministers, and I’m trying to google them
and simultaneously pretend that everything about the evening is okay and
normal, and of course I have no internet signal because we’re in
archeological ruins on the coast of Panama.
Seeing few other options, I casually switch out Mark’s name card with
that of a minor president on a better table. I ferry the name cards
inconspicuously in my handbag so the staff who have emerged and are
milling around don’t notice, and then breathe a sigh of relief and let the
team know what I’ve done.
“He wants to sit next to Castro,” Javi says.
“Not happening,” I respond.
Javi’s my favorite of the coworkers here tonight—Javier Olivan, in
charge of “growth” at Facebook, which means he’s the person responsible
for getting the billions who still aren’t on the platform to sign up. Javi’s a
laid-back Spaniard and one of the few people in top management with a
sense of humor.
When the heads of state finally start arriving, my job is to manage “pull-
asides.” I used to work at an embassy, and “pull-asides” is diplomatic
jargon for exactly what you’d think: pulling to one side the person you want
to talk to. Mark waits on the edge of the crowd, not convinced about any of
this. It’s my job at Facebook to run international policy, and to make this
matter I need to get Mark engaged in the issues and politics Facebook
encounters and creates in the world. Some things that a company needs
done on the international stage, only the CEO can do. It’s just that this CEO
doesn’t want to. Mark is deeply skeptical of all this. And he plainly does not
enjoy it.
My first target is the prime minister of Canada, Stephen Harper. I take a
breath, steel myself, and approach.

“Hello, Prime Minister Harper,” I say. “I’m Sarah Wynn-Williams from
Facebook. You’ll remember me from all the data center and privacy stuff.”
Look, it’s not a great start but it’s all I’ve got, and yes, “remember me” is
definitely a stretch. We’ve never met personally, and if he does remember
our data center negotiations, he might feel we screwed his government over.
Facebook got them to agree to a bunch of concessions and then we built the
data center in Iowa.
He just stares blankly at me like I’m a wart on his foot. Out of the
periphery of my eye I see Javi looking relieved that I’m sourcing heads of
state for Mark.
“Anyway, I’m here with Mark Zuckerberg.” I pause. His expression is
inscrutable. “I was wondering whether you wanted to meet him?”
“No,” Prime Minister Harper says firmly. “I wouldn’t.”
I hear the deflating sound of “Oooooh” beside me, and realize that Javi
has brought Mark over with him, and he is standing right next to me for this
exchange. Prime Minister Harper moves off to mingle with other heads of
state. Mark and I just stand there, looking at each other. I turn to Javi, who
declares, “I’m getting mojitos for all of us,” and strides off to the bar,
leaving me and Mark in an uncomfortable silence. “Make sure they’re
doubles,” I call after him.
For the rest of the cocktail hour, the political leaders avoid us. No one
approaches Mark. He’s not used to this, to being ignored. Usually, he’s
hounded by people who think he’s the most interesting person in the room.
Now he stands awkwardly in the middle of this fancy party, a fish out of
water. The three of us down the mojitos Javi has gotten, and I send him
back for more.
I go to double-check that Mark’s table seating is secure and realize I’ve
been rumbled and the seats switched back. I try swapping the name cards
again with an even lesser-known president’s and stand by and watch as they
get switched back within minutes. The lights start to dim, signaling the end
of the drinks and the beginning of the dinner, and I quickly lay out the
situation to Mark.
“Do I have to stay?” he asks earnestly.

“No,” I answer, conscious that his night has been rather peculiar
already.
“Then let’s leave.”
And right at that moment the lights go out, except for one lone spotlight,
pointed at a tunnel near us. A stream of horses adorned with colorful silks
rushes out, ridden by performers in elaborate costumes.
How do we get out of here?
We can’t go back down the endless red carpet. At the end of the carpet
there’s a large media contingent, and we can’t have the international press
capturing Mark Zuckerberg fleeing from a state dinner. But there’s no other
discernible exit. It’s ruins and fortifications in all directions except for the
red carpet and the tunnel the horses are streaming out of.
The president of Panama stands up and urges people to take their seats. I
take one last look around and make a terrible choice, urging Mark and the
Facebook team, “Run! Follow me!”
I sprint straight into where the horses are emerging from. I figure
wherever the horses are galloping in from, there has to be an exit. But it’s
only as I see the looks of terror from Javi and Mark as they race past me
sprinting in my heels that I realize my mistake. Horses take evasive action
around us, looking equally terrified, and probably not expecting a young
tech CEO to charge at them through the tunnel of a ruined castle or church
or fort or whatever it is we’re running through. This is madness. There’s a
whooshing of hooves and tails and silks, warm mammals, fear, hot breath,
and expressions of surprise in Spanish. And then, abruptly, miraculously,
the tunnel ends. We pop out the other side into darkness.
I double over, partly to catch my breath, partly because I can’t bear to
look at Mark and partly because I have no idea what the security
arrangements are for that many world leaders and I’m afraid that at any
second we’re all going to be taken out by snipers.
When I force my head up, I can see that we’re standing in the middle of
a ginormous field next to some ancient wall, near some straggling horses in
silk that shimmers in the moonlight. Mark gives me a wan smile. Not sure
what else to do, we set off into the darkness, across the fields, dressed in our
formal state dinner outfits, with no cell reception or any sense at all of

where we are other than Panama. We trudge through the black wilderness
for what feels like miles, hoping to come to a road. Eventually, I get one bar
on my phone and call for a car. When they ask me where to send it, I tell
them, “Honestly, I have no idea.” Mark hears this and starts to laugh, and
the others cautiously join in.
That’s pretty much what my early years at Facebook were like. It was a
lot of launching ourselves at various things that did not quite work out like
we expected. I was there for seven years, and if I had to sum it up in a
sentence, I’d say that it started as a hopeful comedy and ended in darkness
and regret. I was one of the people advising the company’s top leaders,
Mark Zuckerberg and Sheryl Sandberg, as they were inventing how the
company would deal with governments around the world. By the end, I
watched hopelessly as they sucked up to authoritarian regimes like China’s
and casually misled the public. I was on a private jet with Mark the day he
finally understood that Facebook probably did put Donald Trump in the
White House, and came to his own dark conclusions from that. But most
days, working on policy at Facebook was way less like enacting a chapter
from Machiavelli and way more like watching a bunch of fourteen-year-
olds who’ve been given superpowers and an ungodly amount of money, as
they jet around the world to figure out what power has bought and brought
them.
That’s the story I’m here to tell.

1
Simpleminded Hope
It was idealism that originally led me to Facebook. Looking back, I’m a
little ashamed to admit that. This was in 2009, back when it still was
possible to be optimistic about Facebook, in those innocent days when it
still was possible to be hopeful about the internet.
It’s hard to admit you wanted to “save the world” without putting it in
quotation marks, but that’s what I thought I’d been doing since my
midtwenties. During those years, I was a diplomat for New Zealand at the
United Nations.
I grew up in Christchurch, which is an agricultural services town, the
biggest city in the South Island and about the size of Lincoln, Nebraska. To
give you a sense of what it’s like, every November there’s a holiday
everyone calls Show Day, where the whole city comes out to see sheep and
vegetables and there’s a dog show and horse racing and a lot of drinking. I
loved Show Day.
I grew up in a family of four kids. The eldest. The responsible one. My
childhood was pretty normal, I guess, except for the time I was attacked by
a shark.
I was thirteen when this happened. We were on vacation at a beach
where my family camped every year. I’m standing in the water with a
friend. I don’t see it. I feel it. A force so powerful and unexpected. A shark
attack is like being hit by a knife attached to a freight train. I’ve never been
on the receiving end of such searing pain as its teeth go deeper and deeper.

It locks its mouth around my torso, just above my waist on my right
side. It feels like it’s trying to get inside me, pushing deeper, trying to rip
my stomach, that chunk of me, away. I’m trapped. It starts shaking me the
way a dog shakes a toy, back and forth, trying to force me under the water. I
go under once and struggle to my feet, then a second time and a third. This
third time I start to take in ocean water and the thought occurs to me, “Oh,
it’s trying to drown me. I could drown.” Like, I thought in a shark attack
you die from the attack, but now there’s a whole new way to die I hadn’t
realized. I’m in its mouth, clenched between its teeth, under the water. I
need air desperately.
My animal instincts kick in. I’m scratching, kicking, punching, pulling,
doing whatever I physically can to escape. It’s like hand-to-hand combat. I
fight with everything I have to try to get my head above the surface.
Whatever I did, it is enough to give the shark a fright. It lets go and
swims away.
I struggle toward the shore and send my friend for help. My swimsuit is
tattered. I look down and see two big puncture wounds and a chunk of skin
missing. Gone. There’s blood pouring out. I’m worried that’s going to bring
the shark back or maybe some other sharks so I stumble through the water
as fast as I can. But once I get to shallow water, I collapse and lie there
alone, feeling the blood oozing out of me, the sting of the salt water, the
hole in my body.
I don’t know how long I’ve been there when some fishermen come
along.
“Are you all right?”
I’m patently not all right. But the other issue is that I’m exposed; the
shark has ripped off enough of my swimsuit that I’m quite naked. I’m also
thirteen. So I try to tell them I’m fine, just hoping they’ll go away. They’re
like, “Um, you don’t look fine.” And I’m all, “I’m okay. I’ll figure it out,
you carry on.” Maybe it’s the blood, or the shreds of swimsuit but they
don’t buy it. “We’ll get you out of the water.” And I’m still telling them I’m
fine when at a certain point they just stop negotiating, pick up my
seminaked body and carry me up to the shoreline. I am dying of shame.
Absolutely dying of shame. On the beach a small crowd starts to form, to

my horror. My parents arrive and lift me into the back of our family car.
The beach is in a remote part of New Zealand and there’s no hospital
nearby. We set off to the closest town, a twenty-minute drive away.
There’s no hospital in the town, so we have to call the local doctor to
open up his medical office, which is a small, single-story building. Once we
get there everyone seems relieved, like the crisis has passed. It’s almost
jovial as my dad and the doctor discuss the cricket and plans for the
weekend. My dad cheerfully explains that yesterday we’d tried to refloat
whales that had stranded on a beach nearby, that I had been in charge of two
small whales we’d nicknamed Moby and Maybe, not knowing if the smaller
one would make it. No one is in a hurry. No one asks me what happened.
The doctor cleans the wound, pulls the skin around the jaw marks together,
and stitches it up so there’s no longer a chunk missing. He gives me a
tetanus shot and warns my parents that I might be a little dramatic that night
because I might be in shock but I’d be fine. I obviously was a fighter.
Everyone laughs.
We return to the campground. I’m allowed to stay in the camper rather
than head under the attached awning with my three siblings because I’m in
pain, which the doctor had told me and my parents to expect, some mild
pain from the stitches. Very quickly I realize this pain is not mild. It’s
searing. I start vomiting up blood and these thick, dark, sticky clots that
look like coffee grounds, which I assume is stomach lining but I know
nothing about the human body. I pull out a large red plastic cup to collect it
so I don’t get the camper dirty.
Everyone else goes to bed but I can’t sleep. It keeps getting worse and
worse. I feel like I’m on fire. I wait, quiet as possible so I don’t wake
anyone. After a while, the red cup is full and I’m onto another. The pain is
excruciating.
Eventually I wake my parents.
“I’m on fire. I’m burning up inside.”
“Go back to sleep. You’ll be fine.”
This continues throughout the night: I wake my parents, they tell me
that the doctor said I’d be fine. We’ll all learn later what actually is
happening. The shark had bitten through my bowel in several places, so it’s

like I’ve been stabbed multiple times. The blood and the contents of my
bowel are leaking into my gut, basically poisoning me. I have sepsis, acute
peritonitis. Eventually there is so much of this toxic blood liquid that it
floods through my body and flows into my lungs, making it increasingly
difficult to breathe. Like I’m suffocating.
I wake my parents again.
“I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe. I can’t get the air in.”
My mother—tired of being woken—responds in an authoritative voice,
“Mind over matter. Stop that hyperventilating.” This has become a family
joke. Now anytime one of us mentions anything, a cold or a cut or
appendicitis, we respond, “Mind over matter. Stop that hyperventilating.”
We later learn that my left lung has collapsed from a pulmonary edema.
And my right lung is damaged.
By morning, I realize I’m losing my ability to keep going.
I wake my parents one more time and say:
“I’m dying.”
But I cannot convince them. And my life depends on convincing them. I
have no Plan B. I can’t drive. I don’t have my own phone. This is 1993.
The next morning, after my family wakes and starts getting breakfast,
I’m barely getting in enough air to breathe. Then my eyes roll into the back
of my head. My mother told me later that when she saw the whites of my
eyes, she felt like she was falling through the surface of the earth. Now she
believes me. And wants to rush me to the doctor.
Problem is, my dad’s MIA. Utterly unworried about how badly I’m
doing, he’s taken the car to show fishermen the scraps of my swimsuit,
hoping they can identify the type of shark and, I suspect, secretly hoping
that they’ll go hunting for it.
When he returns, we get in the car. By now, with one collapsed lung and
fluid rapidly accumulating in the other, it’s taking all my concentration to
keep enough air going in and out. I’m lying prone in the back seat of the
car, and as we make our way toward town, for the first time I start to doubt
whether I can keep doing what I’ve been doing to keep myself alive.
My dad, meanwhile, seems not to be rushing at all. He’s a keen
fisherman. I swear that when we cross any bridge, I can feel the car slow

down while he scans the river for fish, like he always does. From the back
seat my mother tells him to hurry.
Eventually we get stuck behind a farmer who’s moving his sheep across
a short bridge, which is a regular New Zealand thing. I hadn’t factored this
into my estimate of “this is how long I have to keep myself going until I
reach help” and now I completely lose it. I start to lose consciousness. It’s
like lifting off in an airplane. It feels good, weightless and painless. Floating
into unconsciousness where there’s no suffering. But I fight it. I think, “I’ve
got to get back.”
We finally get to town. Back at the same medical office with the doctor
who told my parents I’d be fine. By now I can’t speak, can’t move, and I’m
drifting in and out of consciousness. My dad carries me inside and the
doctor from the day before approaches us. Not this guy, I think, as I’m
hoisted onto a table. He and two other doctors crowd around to examine
me, poking me this way and that, and then they leave abruptly to talk to my
parents off in the corner. I hear one of them say something that I can’t quite
make out but sounds like “she’s dying” or “she’s dead.”
My dad howls, “She was my favorite daughter.” I enjoy that for a
moment. I have two sisters. I can’t wait to tell them. I’d always suspected it.
Then my mother wails, “Just like the cat!” Because our cat Winkels had
recently met an untimely end. Just like the cat. Brutal.
After this my dad gets very angry, yelling at the doctors to do
something, to find out what had gone wrong.
Next thing I know, the doctor comes back. Gets out a very large blade
like a mini ax and starts thwacking it down, carving into my left arm. Then
my right arm. It’s like I’m a piece of meat being hacked open. No
anesthesia. No warning. And I’m beyond the point where I have any control
over my own body. I can’t move or speak. I can’t raise any alarm.
I’d thought the shark attack was more pain than a person can bear, the
worst that could happen. I was wrong.
The doctor repositions himself near my ankle and brings the blade down
with force, splitting the skin and plunging the blade to the bone. Why is the
doctor hacking open my ankles? The only explanation I can muster is that
he thinks I’m already dead. I’m experiencing my own autopsy. The mortal

terror I felt during the shark attack returns, that feeling like, I could die right
this second. Painfully. Hacked to death. Is it weirder to die from a shark
attack or an autopsy? Will they even know they killed me? The fear chokes
me as I anticipate the next ax strike across my neck or skull or some other
vulnerable part of me, delivering the final blow.
Instead the next blow lands on the bone in my left ankle. It’s agonizing
enough that my body spasms. This sparks a change in the room, like they
see me as a person again. Not some inanimate object. They realize I’m
alive. Someone calls for a helicopter to take me to a hospital.
I later learned it wasn’t an autopsy. They knew I was alive. I’d lost so
much blood that the doctors believed if they didn’t get intravenous blood
into me immediately, I would die. In severe trauma cases where it’s
impossible to find a vein, because blood pressure is so low, it’s standard ER
procedure to slice into the arms or ankles. That’s why I have one-inch scars
on my arms and legs. (They’re positively delicate compared with the scars
on my stomach from the jaw marks.) There wasn’t time to give me
anesthetic or explain. I don’t think the doctors expected me to live. By the
time they loaded me up into the helicopter, I don’t think anyone did. And
later, after hours of surgery, the doctors at the hospital tell my parents I’m
unlikely to make it. They started to plan my funeral.
Days later I wake up from a coma in an intensive care unit. I can hear a
nurse calling my mother as I slowly take in my surroundings.
My mother leans over me, looks into my eyes, and says, “Aren’t you
lucky the doctors saved you?”
I can’t talk because I’m on life support and a ventilator is helping me
breathe. So I gesture for a pen and paper. I make eye contact with her to be
sure she’s watching, and write slowly and deliberately, drawing a thick
black line under each word for emphasis:
I SAVED MYSELF
I’m not sure I can name all the ways this experience changed me, but I
think at the very least it probably made me bolder. Any time I glimpse a
possible adventure and have to decide, do I go for this? I do.

I forced myself back in the water, same beach, same time of day, one
year later. I didn’t want to give up swimming in the ocean for the rest of my
life. I liked it too much. Which is to say, I bounced back.
I spent my teenage years having a good time, singing in bands, hanging
out with other kids who liked music, but there was always a sense of, why
did this happen to me? If I survived against the odds, surely there had to be
a reason? Every time someone told me I was lucky to survive, I thought,
Shouldn’t I be doing something with this life? Devoting myself to changing
the world in some way? How do you do that?
In law school, the stuff I was drawn to was human rights and
international environmental treaties, thinking maybe this was the way to
make a difference? In New Zealand, it’s easy to feel like you’re on the edge
of the world. A time zone ahead of everyone else but somehow always
behind. Everything is shaped by other countries. It’s easy to feel adrift in a
sea that others make. After becoming an attorney, I ended up in the foreign
service because it seemed like a way to change the world, and I wanted an
adventure. I ended up at the UN because I genuinely believed it was the seat
of global power. The place you go when you want to change the world.
Which is to say I was young, a New Zealander, and very naive.
My issues at the UN? A lot of protecting. Protecting biodiversity,
protecting oceans, protecting whales, protecting endangered species.
Climate change.
At first, I loved every minute of it, digging into the kinds of big, global
problems that cross borders, stuff you can only make a dent in with
international cooperation. But after years of endless negotiations and
discussion that didn’t seem to result in much change in the world, I found
myself in the bowels of the United Nations’ New York headquarters, a
charmless warren of cramped meeting rooms with cheap furniture and dated
décor, enduring another grueling late-night session on conserving ocean
life. We were drafting the annual report on the “law of the sea,” dozens of
lawyers sitting in a circle, and the delegates were literally arguing over
punctuation. I know it’s a cliché, but it’s a cliché for a reason. Norwegian,
Russian, and Chinese lawyers tussled over whether to insert a semicolon or

a comma after some word in a paragraph deep in a document no one would
ever read.
I’d struck up an unlikely friendship with the aging Argentinian diplomat
I was seated next to. During a pause in the proceedings, he leaned over and
casually asked, “Do you know what the single most impactful thing to
actually protect the oceans over the last decade is?”
“That’s a hard one. You mean a United Nations meeting?” I guessed.
He laughed.
“No. Nemo.”
Thinking “Nemo” might be a Spanish word that I was unfamiliar with, I
laughed too, playing along, not exactly comprehending.
“The fish,” he added. “That little fishy they have to find.”
“Ah.” I finally got it. “Finding Nemo.”
I had to concede that he was right. The system was broken. I was
wasting my twenties toiling long hours with a collection of bureaucrats in
their fifties in the twilights of their careers, arguing about punctuation but
telling ourselves we were saving the environment. When you realize a
cartoon fish can achieve more than the United Nations, it’s time to go.
I moved to a job at the New Zealand embassy in Washington, DC,
hoping I could get closer to where important decisions about the world were
actually made. DC seemed like the center of the world. The funniest thing
about that job was the number of times state officials would comment,
“Wow, your English is really good.” I never had the heart to admit that it’s
my mother tongue. I’d just take the compliment.
The embassy was a tiny operation—just eight diplomats—and I was
responsible for anything Congress or any US government agency might do
that would affect New Zealand, except military or intelligence stuff. I
quickly discovered that the American politicians and officials regarded New
Zealand as a harmless place they might like to visit on vacation but not
relevant to world affairs in any way. That’s how everyone saw us. In 2008,
after Zimbabwe’s president Robert Mugabe refused to leave office
following an electoral defeat, the State Department called in diplomats from
many countries to its headquarters in Foggy Bottom to coordinate a
response. On my way into the meeting, I read my instructions out loud to

my South African counterpart; this was a cable I’d gotten from my bosses
telling me that New Zealand should take a leadership position in opposing
Mugabe. She laughed so hard she could barely catch her breath. “Oooh! I’m
sure after decades of despotic rule Mugabe will be quaking in his boots!
New Zealand’s taking a leadership position in opposing Mugabe!”
Then in early 2009, I was overcome by what I can only describe as a
Facebook epiphany. It started small enough. Facebook was a lifeline for me,
a way to connect to the things that were important to me. Washington, DC,
still felt foreign, and I was a bit lost in it. Logging on to Facebook was like
going to a new but familiar place where my friends, my family, and scraps
of my old life continued. Facebook had been around since 2004, and by this
point in 2009, around four hundred million people were using it globally. It
was still a pretty scrappy outfit, and still seen by lots of people as a place
for college kids to waste time—that’s what made this crazy. I urged my
sisters, my brother, my friends who weren’t on Facebook to join. I spent an
increasing amount of time on Facebook, and followed friends’ new babies,
new relationships, and old photos back home in Christchurch. I noticed
politicians showing up. I remember looking at a New Zealand politician’s
vacation photos, seeing him on holiday, pictures of him and his kids, and
how new that seemed. Then I saw my actual real-life friend Chris Hipkins,
who’d just been elected to Parliament, responding to voters directly on his
Facebook profile.
By mid-2009, while working my embassy job, my fascination with
Facebook evolved into an unshakable belief that Facebook was going to
change the world. But whenever I tried to explain why I believed this, I
failed. Worse, I just sounded utterly insane.
This site was opening up the world. It seemed obvious that politics was
going to happen on Facebook, and when it did, when it migrated to this
enormous new gathering place, Facebook and the people who ran it would
be at the center of everything. They’d be setting the rules for this global
conversation. I was in awe of its ineffable potential.
The vastness of the information Facebook would be collecting was
unprecedented. Data about everything. Data that was previously entirely

private. Data on the citizens of every country. A historic amount of data and
so incredibly valuable. Information is power.
At some point, governments would want to control it. I’d seen at the UN
how things that cross borders, that are valuable and touch many countries,
raise questions like, Who gets the fish in the sea? I’d seen this with
technology especially. When genetically modified organisms became
widespread, the UN wanted to set global rules for this new scary tech. For
years I worked on treaties that tried to figure out the rules, who got the
benefits, how to manage the risk, and who would pay if something went
wrong.
Facebook was going to be a way bigger thing, especially in politicians’
lives—and their constituents’ lives—than genetically altered crops. I can
only imagine the scale of the global battle to set boundaries that was sure to
come.
After years of looking for things that would change the world, I thought
I’d found the biggest one going. Like an evangelist, I saw Facebook’s
power confirmed in every part of everyday life. Whatever Facebook
decided to do—what it did with the voices that were gathering there—
would change the course of human events. I was sure of it.
This is a revolution.
What do you do when you see a revolution is coming? I decide I will
stop at nothing to be part of it. At the center of the action. Once you see it,
you can’t sit on the sidelines. I’m desperate to be part of it. I can’t
remember ever wanting anything more.
There’s one problem. No one at Facebook seems to think this way. As
best as I could tell, Facebook sees itself as a way for people to waste time
on the internet. Facebook does not seem to think of itself as an explosive
force that’s about to tear apart and remake politics all over the world. It
doesn’t even seem to have people working on politics, or policy, or relations
with governments outside the US, or any of the things that consume me. It
doesn’t seem to know that the revolution is coming and that Facebook is it.
So how do I convince them of that? I’ve never been to Silicon Valley.
I’ve never previously identified a revolution or a new form of politics, and I
am what can only be described as a random New Zealander. So … how do I

get to people inside Facebook and persuade them to take my advice? How
do I convince them to give me a job?
That’s the task I set out on.

2
Pitching the Revolution
Pitching a job at Facebook would not have been possible without Facebook.
I see this as yet another confirmation of its importance. I’ve also never
pitched a job before and I have no idea how to do it, especially a job that
doesn’t exist.
The first roadblock is that Facebook the company prides itself on being
difficult to reach. It has hundreds of millions of users and ensures that not a
single one of them can reach its tiny staff with random emails or phone
calls. So in my spare time I start to internet-stalk all possible connections:
contact numbers listed on the site and any email for any staff member
vaguely connected to the issues I’m consumed by.
Initially there really isn’t anyone to pitch to. The only political staff they
have are teaching Congress how to use Facebook, which isn’t the revolution
I’m looking for. Then I learn that Facebook has hired Marne Levine as vice
president of global public policy in the summer of 2010. I don’t know who
she is but I know her hire means that Facebook is starting to think seriously
about politics for the first time. I’m thrilled.
The problem is that it’s impossible to figure out how to reach her.
There’s no contact information on the website, of course. So I spend hours
tracking down Marne’s home phone number and address, and consider
cold-calling her to pitch. Fortunately, in this round of the battle between
desire and reality, the few remaining shreds of common sense, the last
vestiges of social norms, and that final gatekeeper, shame, stop me from
phoning her.

I’ve learned enough about America in my time here that it’s clear to me
that it operates on a “who you know” basis. Armed with that knowledge, I
look for someone connected to Marne who’s also connected to me. I scour
every single person on her Facebook friends list, which mercifully is public.
(I can’t believe Facebook provides a detailed list of everyone’s social
connections—to anyone.) We have one friend in common. That’s it. One
shot.
That mutual friend—Ed Luce—is remarkably good humored about
introducing me to Marne. They both worked for Larry Summers at the
Treasury Department. He offers to put me in touch with another ex-
Treasury colleague, Sheryl Sandberg—the number two at Facebook—but
after hours of research I’m sure Marne’s the right person.
My conversation with Ed happens at his home in DC. I can tell he’s
bemused by the idea of recommending someone for a job that doesn’t exist.
Over a cold beer, he quizzes me on why I’m fixated on working for the
company, what I know of its leadership, and why I’m convinced that
Facebook is going to change the world. In retrospect, I can see he was also
gently probing me to understand whether I knew what I was getting myself
into. I plainly didn’t.
Ed sends an embarrassingly generous email to Marne in which he
suggests that I have something very valuable to offer Facebook and
concludes, “You’ll be amused to know that she worked out I knew you after
perusing your friends on Facebook!”
When I don’t hear back from Marne immediately, I draft a manifesto of
sorts outlining how Facebook should be engaging politically around the
world. My boyfriend convinces me not to send it, certain that the only thing
it will convince Marne of is that I’m a crazy person.
Months pass following Ed’s email to Marne, and my evangelical belief
that I have to work on geopolitical issues at Facebook only hardens and
intensifies. This manifests in diligent follow-ups that are diligently ignored.
Finally, as 2010 is about to draw to a close, I’m standing outside a Loft
clothing shop on Connecticut Avenue just before New Year’s Eve. Marne
has finally agreed to hear my pitch, but I’m fairly certain from the holiday

timing months after my original email that it’s a polite favor to Ed rather
than an indication of any interest in what I’m pitching.
The tiny Facebook office is perched on the fourth floor of a building
that looks more like a house than the office of an actual company. I live
about three blocks away, so I arrive far too early. The biting cold winter
wind forces me to duck inside Loft and peruse the vast array of pantsuits—
the political costume of women seeking power—that the store has curated
for its DC clientele. Ten minutes before our scheduled meeting, I punch the
access code into the elevator and seconds later I’m dislodged into a
cramped office space.
The difference between the elegant embassies that I’m used to and this
office is stark. It’s unlike any office space I’ve ever seen. There are cords,
monitors, food, swag, and toy Nerf guns littering the tiny open-plan space.
A friendly brunette with a Texas accent introduces herself as Marne’s
assistant Meredith and guides me to some couches jammed up against an
internal column. We’re meeting a few days before the New Year, so the
office isn’t busy, but there are some guys scattered around the place who
work at their desks with large headphones on.
My mind swings between “this is simply an insane thing to do” and
“Facebook needs this—they need it so much” every few seconds. I feel
nervous.
When I first had my revelation about Facebook, it seemed so obvious to
me that I’d assumed I’d have to beat out a line of bright, connected
Americans making their way to the company to be part of the same
revolution. Instead I’m having to pitch the revolution to Facebook.
Meeting Marne, I’m struck by her eyes; they’re hazel, intense. Her
blond hair is cut into a sharp bob. I spent so much time devouring
everything about her on the internet that it’s somehow a surprise to actually
be sitting in front of her.
I manage to get out the start of my opening line, “Facebook needs a
diplomat…,” before Marne interrupts me with her first question.
“What do you mean by ‘diplomat’?”
Followed quickly by her second, “Why would Facebook need someone
like that?” And then, “How would you rank that need against the other

needs Facebook has at this time?”
Within minutes I’m terrified of her. We haven’t even made it past
dissecting my opening four words. Marne is someone who really knows
how to ask questions and does it relentlessly. I flounder. She stares into me
with those hazel eyes, never seeming to blink. We actually cover a lot of my
pitch but on her terms. She picks it apart, clinically.
“When I was at the United Nations, countries came together to figure
out how to agree rules on the global movement of genetically modified
organisms,” I say. “This was a new technology that was scary and
challenging at the time. The same thing is going to happen as governments
figure out rules on data and content and all the other things Facebook is
built on. A rulebook is going to be written. Facebook needs to decide where
it stands on all these things. It needs to help write it.”
“Why?” She’s like a human metal detector scanning my words for
something of value.
“Because Facebook is this global political force that is going to change
the internet and the world, and these things matter.”
“Matter to who?”
She is not buying this.
“To the people who’ll decide on rules that might stop Facebook from
growing.”
This gets her attention. I realize that’s the sweet spot. I’m focused on
Facebook the global political force; she’s focused on Facebook the global
business force. The main thing that’s interesting to Marne about other
countries is whether they’ll help Facebook prosper or try to stop it. I’d
believed all the stuff Mark Zuckerberg had said about Facebook not being
created to be a company, that it was built to accomplish a social mission to
“make the world more open and connected.” I hadn’t grasped that Marne
would see it differently.
As I lay out my case that it’s important for the world that Facebook
engage politically, how, like a diplomat serves a country, I saw the need to
protect, promote, and defend Facebook, I sense how innocent and
unnecessary this sounds to her. Especially coming from a young New
Zealander with United Nations all over her résumé, which sits limply

between us. Facebook has not yet experienced any real regulatory
consequences or engaged with governments from outside the US. And it’s
doing fine. With so much to do in the US to establish the company, why
worry about something that hasn’t impacted the company at all?
I speak faster and faster, knowing that at any moment she’s going to end
our meeting and render her verdict, and I’ll find myself ejected back out on
the street. This speed, my New Zealand accent, and nerves combine into
something that may not be entirely comprehensible. I’m not surprised when
she cuts me off.
“Look,” she says. “This has been fascinating. I’ve learned a lot and you
have some really interesting ideas but”—and here she pauses, takes a deep
breath, and her tone changes from brisk politeness to that of a person who’s
had to sit through a timeshare presentation on a property they were never
going to buy—“this team is underwater right now on every type of issue
you can imagine. I’ve only been here a few months and I’ve had Mark in
DC with the Senate Republican High-Tech Taskforce and others on the Hill,
I’ve had our new chief security officer Joe Sullivan making the rounds on
the Hill. I’ve got letters from Franken, Bennet, Rockefeller, and Schumer
and questions from Markey and Barton. The team is working around the
clock and I need a lot of things right now, but let me tell you, a New
Zealand Facebook diplomat is not one of them.”
It’s clear from the exasperated way she says “Facebook diplomat” that I
need to drop that description of the role immediately, and I try to interrupt
to say so, but she continues: “We’re a tiny team right now—just a handful
of people. And I need every single one of them focused on the Hill, focused
on what’s happening here. You’re right that we need more people, and
hopefully we’re going to do that over time, but what I need are people who
are expert in the US regulatory process, who know the FTC or the Hill or
any of the bodies that can actually regulate us. We are an American
company, we are regulated by Americans. I know you know this. What
you’re saying is fascinating but it’s just not our focus. Thank you for your
time. It was great. Have you got plans for New Year’s Eve? Let’s stay in
touch.”

Before I know what’s happening, I’m back out in the biting cold wind
on Connecticut Avenue. I stand on the sidewalk purposefully trying not to
feel the wave of crushing defeat that I can sense is about to roll over me.
But it doesn’t come. As I start to walk the few blocks to my apartment, past
groups of people heading out for an early lunch, I feel strangely at peace.
Like, I lost. But I learned some new things there was no way of knowing
from the outside. I confirmed that no one is thinking about this stuff inside
Facebook. They’re not thinking about any of the issues they’re going to be
facing around the world. And I learned that the way to get them to think
about it is to make it all about growing their business. That’s the kind of
pitch they might respond to.
The brutal rejection only makes me more certain of the need to double
down and convince them to create this job.
So I’m surprised and thrilled when Marne randomly calls weeks later
and throws me a lifeline—by asking me more questions.
“Look—some of the things you suggested might happen in the Middle
East are actually starting to happen and people are bringing up Facebook
and we’re wondering whether we should say something. We’re seeing calls
for Mark to take some credit and we’re trying to figure out if he should.”
“So you’re asking whether I think Mark should take credit for the Arab
Spring?”
At that point in January 2011, uprisings and street protests organized on
Facebook had started in Tunisia and spread to Libya, Yemen, Syria, and
Egypt. When we’d met a month before, I’d mentioned how people were
using Facebook to organize in authoritarian states in the Middle East. I’d
told her this would eventually lead to conflict with governments that would
try to shut down communication, and put Facebook in a challenging
position.
“Yes, well, it’s just something that has come up; the media are quite
interested.”
“Well, I guess we need to talk about China.”
There’s an awkward silence, then a brisk, barely polite, clearly insincere
offer to talk about China at a later date, and she tries to end the call,

reminding me that all she needed to know is whether Mark should take
credit for the Arab Spring.
“Yes,” I say. “How you answer this question about the Arab Spring
depends on what your strategy is for China. If you take credit for the Arab
Spring, if you take credit for a people’s revolution, China will be less likely
to allow Facebook back into China.”
“I think we’re just looking at this from the media interest here in the
US.”
I seize the moment to push again for her to create a role looking at
global strategy, across all the regions, that assesses geopolitical risk so
Facebook doesn’t make these types of decisions in isolation. She quickly
dismisses the idea but, almost as an afterthought, throws me a bone by
saying they’ve opened a communications role in Australia that will do some
policy work, as Facebook’s under a lot of political pressure there because
“somehow the worst of the internet ends up on Facebook Australia.” I tell
her I’m not surprised.
She makes it clear that this is very different from what I’m pitching.
Also, unpromisingly: “We already know who we want for the role and it’s
an Australian and I think we’ll manage to hire them, but if you like, I’m
happy to throw your résumé into the mix. Just as long as we understand
each other so you’re not disappointed. I wouldn’t want you to get your
hopes up.”
Of course, my hopes are sky high. I hear nothing. Nothing happens. It’s
devastating.
In February, to try to break me out of the Facebook funk I have fallen
into, my boyfriend, Tom, suggests that I accompany him on a work trip he’s
taking to Atlanta. I’ve been seeing Tom for less than a year. To this day, he
says we met at a bar. I say we met at a party. What struck me when we met
at a party held in a bar was that he was this person who seemed to be
thinking the exact same thing that I was thinking. And saying the exact
thing I wanted to say. Only somehow he would do it in a witty, charming
way that I never mastered. By now, he has a key to my apartment and pretty
much never goes home to his. He’s a Brit, dark hair, green eyes, a reporter
for the Financial Times.

We’re sprinting through the Atlanta airport to try to make our flight
back when my phone rings. It’s a New Zealand number but not one I
recognize. I answer the call while running, surprised to hear my sister’s
voice.
“I think I’m going to die.”
“Wait, what? I’m in Atlanta!” I stop running and Tom slows down ahead
of me and mimes his confusion, not wanting to shout at me across the
concourse.
“I can’t get through to Mum or Dad or anyone, I’ve borrowed a
phone…”
“What are you talking about?”
“Just tell everyone I love them,” she says. “I don’t think we’re going to
get out and…” The call drops.
Tom hustles me to the gate—we barely manage to board the flight
before it closes. I make my way to my seat and try to call my sister back.
Nothing—I don’t even recognize the busy tone at the other end of the line.
“What was that all about?” Tom asks.
“It was Ruthie.”
Tom looks at me expectantly.
“Um, she actually said she thought she was going to die and she
couldn’t reach Mum and something about not being able to get out … and it
wasn’t her number and the whole thing was really strange.”
It takes less than two hours to fly between Atlanta and Washington, DC,
but it feels interminable. Ruthie’s voice keeps running through my head. I
can feel waves of panic rising through my body. Why hadn’t I called our
parents? Why did I just get on the flight?
As we descend into Dulles International Airport, notifications start
hitting my phone and I see texts and messages from friends and family.
“Has anyone been able to get through to Ruthie?” “Can’t get hold of Ruth.”
“Is your family ok?”
Tom’s googling.
“There’s been an earthquake in Christchurch. It looks bad, Sarah, like
6.3 or 6.5 or higher. I keep seeing different numbers.”

My hometown. Where Ruthie and my parents still live. Again, I try the
number she rang me on. Nothing. I try her mobile. Straight to voicemail. I
try both of my parents. I can’t get through.
Tom leads me off the plane.
The initial reports out of Christchurch are hard to believe. Familiar
buildings have collapsed, some with people trapped inside. It’s clear there
are fatalities but it’s difficult to grasp the scale. Phone lines are down or
overloaded. My sister’s a TV reporter for TVNZ in Christchurch, but her
station and nearly all the other news outlets in Christchurch have been
damaged. So Facebook seems to be the best place for getting information—
people are sharing reports, photos, personal updates, videos. I go through all
of my sister’s friends and focus on her colleagues and closest friends to see
if anyone has any updates. All I find are people checking to see if she is
okay, with no response. Eventually I manage to get through to my parents.
They’re unharmed but neither of them has heard from my sister.
After midnight I instruct Tom to go to sleep and I settle in on the couch,
obsessively checking Facebook and New Zealand news sites. Facebook
plugs me into the disaster in a way that was previously impossible.
Finally, as dawn breaks in Washington, DC, a message pops up, on
Facebook of course: “Love you, lost everything  … nearly died in that
building … am so scared and have no idea where i will sleep tonight. I am
tired … and living by the minute, but thankful I have a job to do. Escaping
from that building was terrifying … cant explain it to you … There was
dust and stuff falling everywhere  … huge cracks. I am so lucky to be
alive … and that sounds like such a small cliche … but I am … One of the
workers just told me of pulling a man out without his head … and I have
seen body after body … there is a morgue beside our live truck. Its scary
here … as I write an aftershock is shaking the truck. Better go … I love and
miss you.”
I watch the aftermath of the earthquake play out on Facebook. People
use the platform to let friends and family know they are safe, share
information on road closures, coordinate sharing supplies, post warnings
about drinking water, offer tips for managing liquefaction—a new concept
to me that is basically the ground melting—offer up spare rooms, and

support those who had experienced the unthinkable. The community whose
physical infrastructure was damaged found a new infrastructure online.
Facebook was operating at every level, friend to friend, neighborhood to
neighborhood. It was a way for the government to get messages to citizens
and for communities to come together. But it all happened organically.
This is it. Seeing all this in action gives me a whole new sense of
Facebook and what it can do. The meeting place Facebook had created
online could be used as a practical political tool in the most old-fashioned
sense. A digital political tool. New Zealanders had come together on the
platform to figure out what had to happen next, to distribute resources and
information, and to connect people to what they needed. This is new and so
important.
As I scroll from page to page on Facebook, I know I have to tell Marne.
I want to share this understanding, so I put together a script for the call. I
want to show her how powerful Facebook is. How Facebook could work
with governments after disasters to communicate essential information.
How the connection Facebook provides feels like a lifeline after a disaster.
And more than I care to admit, having Ruthie vanish from sight, I’m
also reminded how short life is, how you don’t want to die with regret. Even
though I’m sure Marne doesn’t want to hear from me again and has no
intention of hiring me at Facebook, what’s the worst that can happen? She
can continue to ignore me and I’ll be in the same position I am now.
Getting no response on email, I decide just to call her on her mobile
without trying to set up an appointment. She’s definitely surprised and not
in a good way when she hears my voice. Her irritation is softened by
politeness and curiosity when I explain that the reason I’m calling is the
Christchurch earthquake.
I know I have to pitch quickly. But where I’d previously struggled to
articulate the power I saw in Facebook, now it flows, raw and personal.
Almost too personal. I burn with embarrassment when my voice cracks as I
describe how I searched for my sister. I explain how terrified I was for my
family and the lifeline Facebook provided.
By the end of that call, I think she can finally see Facebook through my
eyes. How it’s going to change the world.

When I confess to Tom that I called Marne again to pitch working at
Facebook, I’m ashamed. He’s mortified. He’d argued strongly against it and
he’s convinced I’ve humiliated myself. Tom’s British, and thus especially
attuned to—and appalled by—any interpersonal awkwardness.
I don’t hear back from Marne. Tom sits me down and tells me it’s time
to give up on Facebook and move on. I turn to my best friend for solace,
and to complain about Tom, only to learn that she agrees with him and his
aversion. She gently reminds me that after more than a year of trying to get
my dream job, it still doesn’t exist.
One week after the earthquake, I get an email from a recruiter about the
position in Australia. It’s a communications job I have no interest in, not a
policy position, but I go for it, hoping to use the interviews to talk them into
the job I think they should create for me. Getting each person I interview
with to see the problem, the potential, and the solution: me. In each
interview, I pitch that global policy job with a fervor Facebook employees
seem to find surprising. Long story short, many interviews and three
months later, Marne calls out of the blue.
“I’d like to offer you the job.”
“Which one?”
“Well, which one do you want? The one you interviewed for or the one
you pitched?” There’s more than a hint of recrimination in her voice.
“The one I pitched,” I respond without hesitation.
“I’m not sure that’s how this should work, but the job’s yours.”
I can’t believe I have the opportunity to work on the greatest political
tool of my lifetime. I can’t believe my luck that I’m going to be part of
Facebook and the positive changes it’s sure to bring. The biggest adventure
I can imagine is about to begin and there’s nothing on earth I’d rather be
doing.
My title will be Manager of Global Public Policy.
“But you know,” Marne adds, “I’m still not even sure this is a job.”
I’m stunned and just sit on the other end of the phone in silence.
“I mean, it’s great, you’re great, and I’m sure you’re going to find ways
to add value. I’m just not sure that there’s enough work to do on this stuff, I

mean the stuff you’re interested in, to make it a real job, but we’ll figure it
out.”
I had no idea what I was getting myself into.

3
This Is Going to Be Fun
My first day at Facebook: July 5, 2011. The Washington, DC, Facebook
office has moved downtown since my last interview and I’m incredibly
nervous as I walk into the utilitarian reception area the next week. Like
Facebook’s offices in California, the DC office pipes and air ducts are
exposed; it’s all raw concrete and garish paint. Fake graffiti on the walls. If
this seemed odd in Silicon Valley, it’s ridiculous in this DC office building,
which is so fancy that all the offices have glass windows facing a huge
atrium, so you can see into the plush surrounds of lobbying and law firms.
Marne’s assistant Meredith McCollum—who handled logistics for my
many interviews—is there to collect me, and I’m relieved to see a familiar
face. After a quick tour, she shows me to a barren white desk in a room full
of desks. I’ve arrived early and the office is empty aside from the two of us.
“Okay—if you want to give me your laptop, I can get you set up before
everyone else gets in.”
“My laptop?” I stare at Meredith, confused.
“Ah, yeah. They gave you a laptop at orientation in California, didn’t
they?”
It slowly dawns on me that I’ve made a terrible mistake.
“Yes, they did,” I respond as neutrally as possible. “It’s just that I
thought that was like a home laptop.”
“What’s a home laptop?” Meredith looks baffled.
“Um, you know, a laptop to use, ah, um … at home.” I stumble across
words, trying to explain.

“Why would we give you a laptop for your house?”
“I don’t know. I guess I was expecting there to be a computer here at my
desk. I mean at a technology company…”
“Well there would be, if you had brought your laptop in.”
I incoherently try to explain to her that at my previous job—for the New
Zealand embassy—any work on a laptop happened on our personal laptops
at home. In fact, the embassy was so slow to adopt technology that staff
didn’t even have access to the internet at work, other than one “internet
computer” we all shared. Security concerns, we were told. Incompetence,
we suspected.
During the crazy, cultish Facebook orientation program, everyone kept
talking about how generous Facebook was as an employer, so I just guessed
the laptop was for home use. I was wrong. Meredith tells me I should run
back to get it.
“Marne’s going to be here before too long and she will definitely be
expecting to see you and your computer.”
I jog in unseemly haste and heels past the reception area I’d entered so
recently, and back out to the street and the Metro. As I near home, I bump
into a friend who’s setting off to work.
“First day didn’t go well then?” he says with a smile.
When I return to the Facebook office, Marne’s already at her desk. She
welcomes me and (re)introduces me to Meredith, who winks at me the
moment Marne goes to speak to other members of the team. It’s clear that
Marne has no idea I’d been in the office an hour earlier. As soon as we’re
out of earshot, I beg Meredith, “Please don’t tell anyone I came to work
without a computer.”
“This is going to be fun,” she replies, before turning to follow Marne.
I know what I want this job to be. It’s clear that in these next few years,
Facebook and governments all over the world are going to be figuring out
the rules of the road for these giant, globe-spanning internet companies.

What they set in place will determine how social media is used for decades
to come. It will affect elections, privacy, free speech, taxes, and so much
else. I want to be part of that. The debating, the shaping, the deciding. I
imagine the kinds of arguments we used to have at the UN. We’ll be sitting
down with governments to puzzle out what’s best, the trade-offs, the
competing interests, sharing the spoils, all of it. We need to get this right,
for the hundreds of millions who are sure to be using these platforms every
day, for years to come.
So. Where to begin? I sit down at my new desk and realize I have
absolutely no idea what I should do next.
I begin writing a memo to my bosses, suggesting that we create a
“global council”—fifteen to twenty experts around the world who can
advise us on the political and strategic issues in their countries, as needed. I
check with a friend at Goldman Sachs who confirms that they have
something like this. Other international companies do too. This idea is
rejected within days. “We make the decisions,” I’m told. The bosses don’t
want a bunch of outsiders all up in our business that way.
That first day I also get an assignment. Marne tells me I’m going to be
in charge of one of the first visits by a foreign head of state to Facebook at
our headquarters in California. Coincidentally, it’s the prime minister of
New Zealand, John Key. The perfect collision of my old and new worlds!
Facebook hasn’t done many of these visits, and building relationships with
heads of state had been part of my pitch when I proposed this job to Marne.
Building relationships before Facebook needs them.
I ask if Mark Zuckerberg will host the prime minister. In my old job at
the embassy, we’d just assume that was how it would go. Our top person
would meet their top person. The prime minister is seeing President Obama
on this visit, so it doesn’t seem like a strange question to me.
People don’t openly laugh, but they come close. It’s made very clear to
me that Mark has no interest in policy or politics—that’s Sheryl’s world—
and specifically no interest in meeting the prime minister of New Zealand.
His focus is engineering, and his disregard for politics is a point of pride.
This seems odd to me, given that he’s created one of the world’s all-
time greatest political tools. How can he not be interested in politics? I’m

also disappointed because the implications are obvious. I had hoped he just
hadn’t got around to it. But if the CEO genuinely isn’t interested in policy
or politics, it’s going to be hard to make much of the job I dreamed up,
which is about Facebook policy and politics.
It’s gently suggested to me that Mark’s such a political naif that it isn’t
in the company’s interest to put him forward to meet heads of state.
Yet I know that all John Key cares about is getting a photo with Mark
Zuckerberg. I inform the New Zealand team that this won’t be possible, but
that I’m hoping to find someone senior for the prime minister to meet. The
prime minister has briefed the New Zealand press that he’s meeting “top
brass” at Facebook and I’m desperate to ensure that isn’t me. I’ve heard
through other New Zealanders at Facebook that Sheryl has plans to visit
New Zealand on vacation at the end of the year. Desperate for any hook to
get an executive to take the meeting, I use that as the basis of the pitch to
have her meet the prime minister. She tentatively agrees but it’s made clear
that Elliot Schrage should be presented as the host, as she is a very busy
person. I should simply mention that it’s possible Sheryl will “drop by.”
Elliot is Marne’s boss. He reports to Sheryl, who, of course, reports to
Mark. He’s one of the people I talk to almost every day. I’d describe him as
a bearlike intellectual. Charismatic. Fatherly. Tall. Ferociously clever.
Messy hair and rumpled outfits and glasses. Elliot ran communications and
public affairs at Google in its early days, before he came over to Facebook
to do the same. A family man, married with three kids. I like him. He’s got a
warmth and affable charm. But there’s a steely side to him too. When
people fuck up, he’s quick to drill down and take them apart, point by point.
He seems to be taking measure of everyone, all the time, and he’s good at it.
You want him to like you.
The New Zealanders aren’t thrilled with the idea of meeting Elliot—
rather than Mark or Sheryl—but as I learned during my time in the New
Zealand Foreign Service, we take what we can get. So the meeting is
scheduled.
The next challenge is figuring out what actually happens next. There
isn’t a set of talking points for what Facebook wants to say to foreign
governments or a strategy. There’s nothing.

So I prepare a briefing for Sheryl and a handful of senior executives
about the prime minister’s visit, laying out some regulatory and policy
issues I think it’ll be helpful for them to discuss with him. Hoping this will
trigger interest in a broader strategy.
The only problem I run into during this prep is the number of random
Facebook employees from New Zealand who simply assume they’ll be
participating in the prime minister’s visit in some way. Following the
protocol I learned at the embassy, I dissuade them. Heads of state shouldn’t
meet with a haphazard group of people from various departments for no
reason.
Then I receive a call from Marne, who tells me that all of these people
are “friends of Sheryl” and I should be as accommodating as possible.
Right, I think. It’s the private sector. Government protocols don’t mean
anything. Sheryl’s friends do.
I let Sheryl and other senior executives know that they should manage
their expectations about formality, because New Zealanders are very
informal. I share the example of what happened when New Zealand’s
former prime minister Helen Clark visited the United Nations. The State
Department officer who wanted to know how many cars would be in her
motorcade couldn’t believe it when I explained that she would probably just
take a cab or walk. Assuming I was thick, he repeated the question, kindly
giving me examples of other countries—“For example, Norway will have
two cars in their head of state delegation”—before finally accepting that
New Zealand would have zero cars in our delegation.
There’s much incredulity about this fact when I explain it to the
Facebook executives. There’s also some cynicism, especially from
Facebook’s director of global communications, Debbie Frost. Debbie
becomes one of my closest friends at Facebook; we started down that path
during my job interview when she cut me off as I was trying to explain the
work I’d done at the UN on a treaty for genetically modified organisms. She
reached over and touched my arm. “If you found those fucking seeds at the
boring United Nations interesting,” she said, “then you’re really going to
love working here, where things are actually interesting.” I loved that. And
I’d learn soon enough, this was typical. In one sentence, she simultaneously

dissed my work history, told me I’d bored her, and winked at me. An
Australian with dyed blond hair who was raised in Hong Kong and
educated in the United Kingdom, she’s one of the few foreigners in senior
roles at Facebook.
“Should we expect this prime minister to show up on foot or maybe a
bike?” Debbie asks, deadpan.
I insist that I know what I’m talking about, and given my years as a
diplomat, the executives give me the benefit of the doubt.
The following day the prime minister arrives in a full motorcade, with
multiple armored vans and many California Highway Patrol motorbikes to
clear traffic. They speed into the entrance of Facebook’s unassuming
headquarters on University Avenue. As the prime minister, his entourage,
and a swarm of security step out of large bulletproof black vehicles into the
blinding California sunlight, Debbie turns to me and says, “Maybe the
prime minister left his bike at home today.”
The security detail is surprisingly aggressive, particularly given the
threat level attached to a New Zealand head of state. They push Facebook
employees out of the way to clear a path for the prime minister to walk.
Perhaps they’re unused to leading a head of state through a building where
women in tiny shorts on rip sticks zoom past bearded guys on motorized
beer coolers.
The New Zealand delegation is at least thirty minutes early. Perhaps
they had nothing else to do. Before we proceed to the designated meeting
room, the prime minister turns to me and asks, “You’re Ruthie’s sister,
aren’t you? I heard you just got engaged; congrats.”
“Thank you! I’m heading back to New Zealand to get married but
we’ve planned precisely nothing. Just under six months to figure everything
out.”
“Yeah, Ruth was telling me that. I actually saw her last week. She’s a
bridesmaid, isn’t she?”
While we chat, a handful of Facebook communications team executives
arrive and belatedly join our conversation. One of them gestures to the
prime minister and says, “Seems it’s true that everyone in New Zealand
knows each other or their sister. Are you two related?”

“Can I introduce the prime minister of New Zealand?” I say.
“Yeah, right,” he responds.
“No, seriously,” I say.
“Seriously,” repeats the prime minister of New Zealand. He starts to
explain how he knows my sister because she’s a TV reporter, how we all
share a hometown, and how he bonded with my sister when he was
surveying earthquake damage. She reported on it while still traumatized
from being trapped in her collapsed workplace only hours before.
The Facebook employees stand together mute and embarrassed.
While the prime minister and I are chatting, Mark Zuckerberg emerges
from one of the nearby conference rooms. I’d never seen him in person.
Until now, any interaction had been over videoconference. He’s smaller,
paler, and—at that moment—angrier than I anticipated. With his ill-fitting
T-shirt and jeans and unruly hair, he looks like the other engineers milling
around the building—though more agitated. To be fair, we’re in the middle
of a companywide lockdown—several weeks where everyone is
encouraged to stay at work day and night—triggered by the launch of
Google Plus, which is widely seen as a “Facebook killer.”
Mark quickly identifies me as the person responsible for the ever-
growing circus of security, consulate officials, prime minister’s staff, and
New Zealand Facebook employees whom I’d worked into the meet and
greet. He marches toward me, ignoring the chaos between us. Everyone’s
now watching. I feel rather than see the New Zealand prime minister
straighten himself beside me.
“Hi, Mark—did you want to meet the New Zealand prime minister?”
“No. I already said I definitely didn’t want to do that,” he says, looking
me directly in the eyes.
“Uh, well, okay … um, well, since he’s actually right here, John Key,
prime minister of New Zealand, this is Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s
CEO.”
I gesture for them to shake hands. Mark looks stricken and jumps back.
Key seizes the moment and steps forward with an outstretched hand. An
enterprising mandarin from the New Zealand delegation lifts a cumbersome
iPad, in keeping with the New Zealand embassy’s Amish technical

capabilities, and snaps a photo as the prime minister grasps Mark’s hand in
his—the only thing Key had wanted from the visit to Facebook.
Mark smiles automatically for the camera and then returns to irritation
and discomfort, which he doesn’t try to hide. He disentangles himself from
the prime minister’s grip and turns to me.
“What’s going on? Some of my engineers are getting pushed around”—
and he gestures at the large security presence that is encircling the four of
us. This is the culture of Facebook. The engineers get what they want. All
of us on “Sheryl’s side” are lesser mortals who do the things the engineers
don’t want to trouble themselves with. We’re not to bother the engineers.
I step closer to Mark and say as quietly as possible, “I know you’re
really busy, but could you please perhaps have a quick word with the prime
minister?” The begging tone in my voice is unmissable. Even to the prime
minister. Mark shoots me a look I struggle to decipher and then turns to the
prime minister, who beams as he scrolls through the photos on the iPad,
discussing with his advisers which one to post.
Mark makes what could generously be called polite conversation with
the prime minister if he weren’t so transparently annoyed. The effort is felt
by everyone. The prime minister, with his photo in hand, is affable and
happy to engage in small talk before Mark skulks back into the room
crammed with male engineers.
I whisk the prime minister and his security detail over to the meeting
room to meet Elliot. When Sheryl arrives a few minutes into the meeting,
the contrast with Mark is striking. She greets the prime minister like an old
friend. The stern professional I’d briefed the day before has transformed
into a celebrity. For all the times I’ve met Sheryl, it feels like this is the first
time I am really seeing her. She turns on the charisma and it transforms her
from a normal-looking fortysomething woman into someone genuinely
glamorous. I swear—her hair, her eyes, her makeup, her skin—suddenly
she positively glows. Sparkles. Like she’s the star of her own show,
radiating confidence and charm.
The prime minister, sensing a like-minded politician, quickly relaxes
into what feels more like a catch-up coffee than a meeting with a head of
state. Until this moment, it had never occurred to me to see Sheryl as a

celebrity or be awestruck by her. I didn’t really know who she was before I
started researching Facebook. But now I can see how she’s sprinkling some
of her stardust, whatever that magical quality is that she has that makes you
forget to focus on the substance of the meeting at hand and instead wonder
what it is she’s doing differently that makes her better than you. As I look
around, I see all of us are agog, in a way that we weren’t with Mark or
Elliot.
The prime minister’s office had released a statement suggesting that
cooperation on technology and innovation issues would be discussed, but
it’s more of a friendly chat with IT help thrown in. Sheryl spends most of
her time advising the prime minister on how to use his Facebook page,
trying to assuage his irritation about the five-thousand-person friend limit,
and addressing his desire to continue using his Facebook profile rather than
his Facebook page to communicate. From there I expect the conversation to
turn to regulation, potential cooperation, privacy, security, or any of the
other issues I had diligently included in the briefing I prepared for the
meeting. Instead talk turns to my upcoming wedding and Sheryl’s plans to
vacation in New Zealand at the end of the year. It becomes more surreal as
the prime minister starts imploring us to find his friend Choppy in
Queenstown, who manages a scenic helicopter business, and to tell Choppy
that the prime minister sent us to “get the real tour.” Before I know it, the
visit is over and I’m waving off the ginormous motorcade, wondering what
just happened.
I’m stunned at the complete and utter lack of substance.
This is not how I pictured things working.

4
Auf Wiedersehen to All That
I’m determined to do better with the next foreign visitor the following
week, the German minister of consumer protection. Most countries like
Facebook. Germany’s an outlier. The Germans disapprove of everything
Facebook stands for.
It wasn’t very long ago that Germans lived with networks of spies and
informants in their country—the Stasi in East Germany and the Gestapo
before that. As a result, they have a fundamental suspicion of anyone who
wants to gather lots of personal information—which of course is
Facebook’s business model. Where others see a website that’s good for
wasting time, Germans see a comprehensive surveillance tool that needs
muscular oversight. This instinctive and deeply held wariness of a
technology company centralizing and processing vast amounts of personal
information raises questions that Facebook has never had to answer,
certainly not to a government. Germany, prescient because of its history,
can see around corners. It’s on the verge of passing laws and starting
investigations into Facebook—one of the first countries to do so.
Because of all this, prepping to meet with the German minister is the
first time Marne seems worried about accountability. I’m surprised by how
nervous she is, given her extensive government experience. The meeting
will be in our DC office, and I suggest starting with a tour.
The minister and delegation start frowning as soon as I showcase the
open-plan office. I assume they’re troubled by the graffiti or the mess or the
many Nerf guns and toy weapons lying around.

“Is everything okay?” I politely inquire.
“This is not very practical,” the minister says, pointing at the ceiling,
which is crowded with exposed air ducts, pipes, hanging bald light fixtures,
and rough concrete. “All this infrastructure. It is surely not up to code? You
know—a code violation?”
The rest of the German officials nod in vigorous agreement. Some
mutter “code violation” to reinforce her point.
“Umm … er … it’s meant to embody the journey of Facebook. To show
that we’re only one percent finished. I mean, I understand that before we
rented this space, it was finished like those law and lobbyist offices you can
see through the window. And then they had to strip back all that luxurious
finishing. The carpets and everything.”
“You dismantled the furnishing of a proper office to make it look like
this? Like it is under construction?” one of the officials inquired,
incredulous.
“It’s symbolic,” I start to say. This all had sounded much more
convincing in California when Sheryl explained it to the New Zealand
prime minister. I start to realize that Facebook’s office is reinforcing the
idea that Facebook is reckless and feckless and nothing good is going to
come from continuing the tour. As the members of the German delegation
stare at me in disbelief, with some audibly tutting, I make the executive
decision to get to the meeting room as quickly as possible. Better to hurry
past all the posters that say things like THINK WRONG, MOVE FAST AND BREAK
THINGS, and IS THIS A TECHNOLOGY COMPANY?
As soon as the German delegation is seated in the meeting room, we
start formal introductions. Marne explains her background, that she’s
relatively new to Facebook, having most recently worked at the White
House under Larry Summers. At the end of listing her Harvard and
government credentials, she concludes with, “And I’m Jewish.”
The room is silent.
“I mean, I don’t bring that up because of the Holocaust.”
Absolute silence. As if every living thing in the meeting room has been
frozen. I’m trapped in some terrible parody of diplomacy.

“It’s just I figured you already knew,” she continues. “We can discuss it
if you wish?”
The tension in the room is unbearable. I picture leaving and walking
back home. Leaving this whole Facebook thing behind me.
“I think we could probably turn to the substantive part of the agenda we
agreed on, now that we’ve covered introductions,” I cut in, desperately.
We settle into the discussion. Very quickly the delegation brings up
content moderation. They want Facebook to be more vigilant in pulling
down hate speech. Marne explains that Facebook’s built on the kinds of free
speech rights embodied by the First Amendment in the United States, so we
generally leave content untouched. She then segues into an example of
cultural differences between the US and Germany. She says she doesn’t
care to sunbathe topless or to share topless images, but that Germans seem
to. I don’t think I’m the only one in the room struggling to avoid the mental
image of Marne topless. And the overgeneralization that all Germans enjoy
sharing topless images isn’t helping either. The minister physically bristles.
I flash Marne a “What are you doing?” look.
It’s downhill from there. The discussion on regulation doesn’t go much
better.
After the delegation is escorted out of our offices, I’m despondent. This
was horrible at every level. We failed when it mattered. With the country we
most needed to win over. I hadn’t contemplated failing at this. For the first
time, I think this might not work.
Marne, sensing my displeasure, says to me, “Not quite the foreign
service? Regretting pitching this?”
I don’t answer. One thing you learn as a diplomat, or maybe just as an
adult: there are times to keep your thoughts and feelings to yourself.
No one’s surprised when the German government opens an
investigation into Facebook a few weeks later.

5
The Little Red Book
This place is completely different from anywhere I’ve ever worked. And it’s
not just technology that makes it different. There’s also money.
One of the upsides of the immediately punishing workload that started
as soon as I joined Facebook is that Marne’s assistant Meredith is assigned
to help me as well. She’s the heart and soul of the DC office, and in addition
to being caring and funny, she’s incredibly stylish. One night she’s staying
late to help me and I notice that she’s wearing shoes I’ve been admiring for
weeks.
“I love those. That red sole is incredible. I’ve never seen that before.
Where’d you get them?” I ask.
Meredith comes over to my desk and places her hands on my shoulders.
I’m not expecting this kind of physical contact from our assistant, but
Facebook is more informal than my other workplaces and I kind of enjoy
the intimate gesture, hoping it’s the prelude to her divulging where I can get
these phenomenal heels.
“Sweetie, you’ll never be able to afford a pair like these,” she says,
softly but kindly.
After I google “red sole shoes” and discover Christian Louboutin, it’s
clear she’s right. I’m mortified.
I learn soon enough that I have no reference points for the obscene
wealth that flows through Facebook. What makes it so strange is that it’s
based on tenure, rather than title. So assistants and junior staff are often
worth vastly more than their bosses, based on when they were hired. Like

people who bought a house in a neighborhood that instantly gentrified. All
employees receive stock options, starting a year after they join. The
company hasn’t gone public yet—it’s 2011—so there’s no Facebook stock,
but there’s a thriving market of private investors who pay gobs of money to
buy those stock options.
At work I get distracted in meetings by women’s engagement rings that
are so large it looks like it’s hard for them to type, and diamond bracelets
that cast small rainbows on the wall and clatter against laptops. I’ve learned
my lesson and refrain from asking about all the matching handbags; turns
out they’re Louis Vuitton and cost thousands of dollars. Facebook offices
are glutted with female status symbols and I’m ashamed at how many are
completely lost on me. I’m not even at the starting line in this subtle arms
race of assets and armor.
Another sign of the wealth at Facebook? The weird things people say.
One day, Sam Lessin, a director of product, refers to himself as both “price
insensitive” and “economically insensitive.” I have to ask Marne what he
means. The answer? He has so much money that he doesn’t care what
things cost.
When Debbie refers to herself as an “economic volunteer like most of
the ex-Googlers at Facebook,” I have no idea what she’s saying. Over
coffee she explains to me that she made so much money from the Google
IPO that the salary she earns at Facebook is basically meaningless to her
overall wealth. She’s at Facebook waiting for Facebook’s IPO.
My situation is different. Money’s tight. I didn’t negotiate for anything
when I joined Facebook, feeling grateful that they would give me the job.
They simply matched my (very much nontech) salary. Most of this goes to
rent, because Tom and I have apartments in two expensive cities (he’s
recently taken a job in New York). A life where you aren’t concerned about
money is unfathomable to me, and that dividing line is a constant presence.
The other currency that flows through Facebook is stamina. Marne,
Elliot, and Sheryl ruthlessly manage their own labor, extracting as much
work out of each day as humanly possible. They expect their teams to do
the same. Effort, productivity, and the sacrifice of everything else in life are
valorized and fetishized.

Marne’s work ethic sets the rhythm of my life, and it’s unlike anything
I’ve experienced before—even in the corporate law firms I worked at.
Unlike senior diplomats who, in my experience, were often more grandees
wanting to bless the work done by the team beneath them, Marne is a true
Facebook Stakhanovite. Her ferocious work ethic and endurance are
astounding. To me it seems her emotions, instincts, and physical needs are
all sublimated into her job. A numb efficiency ruled by all-consuming self-
discipline and self-denial. After a full day’s work without break, Marne will
regularly continue at home until the small hours of the morning, rising
before 5:00 A.M. to begin work again before exercising. I rarely see her eat.
From her toned frame, I assume every calorie is ruthlessly tracked,
calculated, assessed, and efficiently eliminated. It’s left her with a body that
looks like hard work.
As her employee, I feel I have no choice but to adapt to her routine,
working with crushing intensity and sleeping only for the few hours
between 1:00 A.M. and 5:00 A.M. that she’s asleep, to ensure I’m available to
respond to her emails when she sends them. Sometimes I like to remind her
—in the small hours of the morning—that she’d declared just a few months
ago that she wasn’t sure there was enough work to make my job a job.
One day I ask her about all we’re sacrificing for our jobs—family,
hobbies, friends, anything that’s not work. She seems surprised.
“But this is it. This is what I do,” she says. “I’m not going to learn the
piano or run marathons or speak new languages. I’m not looking for
hobbies.”
“But what about friends?” I counter, instinctively knowing that the
family question is off-limits.
“My heart is full, Sarah. I have wonderful friends. But they’re in the
thick of it too. I’m not looking to make new friends. I’m good.”
Years later, after a few wines at Davos, Sheryl tells me that the
punishing scale of work is by design. A choice Facebook’s leaders had
made. That staffers should be given too much to do because it’s best if no
one has spare time. That’s where the trouble and territoriality start. The
fewer employees, the harder they work. The answer to work is more work.

To encourage this, the Facebook offices are overflowing with “perks.” I
think this part of Silicon Valley work life is something everyone’s heard
about by now. It’s parodied on TV shows. The offices are like a never-
ending kid’s birthday party. All meals are provided, endless free snacks,
game arcades. Bring your laundry to work and someone will do it for you.
They’ll pay for transport if you can’t access Facebook’s free transportation.
I feel deeply conflicted about these perks, simultaneously eye-rolly and
loving it.
But the quid pro quo is clear. This stuff isn’t free. As Mark declares in
the Little Red Book every employee is handed when they’re hired,
Our philosophy on perks is that we want to provide services that are
utilitarian and help people with things they need in order to help
them focus on our long-term goals. Everyone needs to eat. Everyone
needs to do laundry. Everyone needs health services. Everyone
needs to get to work. If we can make these parts of our lives easier,
then it helps us focus on what we’re trying to accomplish at work
and it makes us all more productive.
Like Chairman Mao’s original, Facebook’s Little Red Book is filled
with quotes, images, and core principles from its supreme leader, although
in this case of course that’s Mark rather than Mao. Another MZ channeling
his own peculiar form of Maoist zeal. The first page reads, “Facebook was
built to accomplish a social mission—to make the world more open and
connected.”
Employees are encouraged to believe they’re changing the world, not
working for a corporation. “Changing how people communicate will always
change the world,” it declares. “We expect you to change the world.”
The truth is, of course, that Facebook is changing the world—that’s
what attracted me to the company in the first place. But it’s also a
corporation. The Little Red Book says that what we’re doing is more than
capitalism; it’s social justice. Facebook is social change, humanitarian
change. And we are a family. The Facebook Family.
Most people seem to take it seriously. Both the idea of the Facebook
Family and Facebook’s mission. Maybe because we’re mostly in our

twenties and early thirties, we’re particularly susceptible to the moral and
social messages that leadership is indoctrinating us with. Or at least I am. I
buy it. Working at Facebook isn’t a job; it’s your life. I don’t quibble. I love
the work. I feel privileged to be part of it.
And I like Marne. I like Sheryl. I like Elliot. This is so basic, but it’s
nice working with people who are so smart. And the work feels important.
Like Facebook is a force for good in the world. It’s a mission-focused
company, and I share that sense of mission. I feel so lucky to be part of
helping Facebook make the world more open and connected.
And within weeks after I arrive at the company, we do begin setting up
some first rules of the road for how social media should operate, just like
I’d hoped. It’s exciting. I work with other teams to create the first public
Community Guidelines for Facebook, detailing for users what you can and
can’t post on the site. We put out Facebook’s first transparency report,
which Marne pushed for. It’s a count of all the requests that governments
around the world make for us to take down content. We come up with
Facebook’s rules for dealing with law enforcement. What personal
information will we give law enforcement access to? Under what
circumstances?
When one of the few older women on the team tells me I’m spending
too much time at work and this is just a job, I honestly think she’s the one
who doesn’t get it.

6
What Do We Stand For?
Each day in Facebook’s policy team brings fresh chaos. A contractor in
Vietnam sends a casual email mentioning that he met with the leadership of
the Vietnamese government and made a bunch of promises that aren’t fully
explained or doable. A Facebook consultant tells a government committee
in Australia that Facebook removes twenty thousand underage users per
day, which is simply incorrect. The Mexican president is hit by a poop
emoji storm on his page and petitions us for its immediate removal. Sheryl
asks if she should support a viral campaign to arrest Joseph Kony, the
Ugandan militant responsible for abducting thousands of children for his
army. ISIS posts a beheading video on the site. A group of mothers stage a
breastfeeding sit-in to protest Facebook’s policy on nipples. A rabbi posts
that he’s having coffee and a muffin in Israel, but Facebook’s maps say he’s
in Palestine. The problems are relentless and varied. Figuring out how to
solve them feels like connecting the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle without
knowing the picture you’re trying to build, but it feels important, working
out how to do this stuff responsibly, if we’re going to be a force for good in
the world.
And Marne and I are a good team. I trust her judgment, and she listens
to me. We’re making steady progress, shaping this new future.
By early 2012, some of the men in the office start chafing at how we’re
lurching from one crisis to the next. These are guys we hired mainly to
service Congress and state governments. They’re creatures of Washington,
DC, pugnacious and opinionated. They’ve formed a little cabal, and they

want to understand what the company stands for. It’s not an unreasonable
request. This is the Obama era, a time when Mark and Sheryl are on the
covers of magazines, giving interviews with flashy headlines about how
they’re changing the world. The boys corner Marne, demanding to know
how we’re meant to change the world. They’re shocked when the answer
is … nothing really.
Marne, meanwhile, is baffled by their questions. For her and her bosses
Mark and Sheryl, it’s obvious. We run a website that connects people.
That’s what we believe in. We want more. We want it to be profitable and to
grow. What else is there to say?
There is no grand ideology here. No theory about what Facebook should
be in the world. The company is just responding to stuff as it happens.
We’re managers, not world-builders. Marne just wants to get through her
inbox, not create a new global constitution.
There is no bridging this gap in perspective. From the boys’ perspective,
they want something to believe in. Principles. Vision. Leadership. From
Marne’s point of view, there’s nothing wrong with plugging along as we do,
managing each crisis as it comes. That’s business.
Nevertheless, something has to be done to quiet the troops. And that’s
how we end up planning a summit at headquarters in California for
everyone who works on policy and political issues. To decide what we
stand for.
I’m sympathetic to what the boys are saying. From the moment we met,
Marne treated my “Facebook is a revolution,” “Facebook is a political
force” speeches as vaguely embarrassing. She politely ignored that part of
my pitch and since then has consistently communicated that this isn’t what
we do here, we’re not even sure there’s a job doing the stuff I’m interested
in, and please stop talking that way. I get that this is where she’s coming
from, but I’m also quietly confident that as Facebook grows, the company
will find itself embroiled in conflicts and controversies overseas that will
prove my point. My belief in Facebook and its historic importance
overrides any fleeting concerns about Marne’s attitude. The company will
need to develop a theory of how to be in the world. And I’ll help them

shape it. Marne, Mark, and everyone else will come around to my way of
thinking.
And this summit is a first step toward that. I’m excited for it.
This will be the first time we’ll all be in a room together. The first time
we will talk about how we can use Facebook as a force for good in the
world. This could be the start of something important. A new beginning.
My first clue that this might not be everything I hoped for comes as the
whole policy team gathers together at Facebook’s newly minted
headquarters in Menlo Park, California. We’re still a small enough team,
around a dozen people, that we fit around one table in a regular conference
room. Instead of diving straight into the many critical issues we need to
solve, we play icebreaker games and are assigned personality quizzes. It’s
not until late in the day that we turn to the reason we all flew in: finding an
issue that Facebook can lead on. We agree that it has to be something where
we’ll be collaborating with governments around the world, to build trust.
People on the team put forward various initiatives that they’re passionate
about: promoting Facebook as a way to connect abandoned pets with new
homes, or showcasing Peace.Facebook.com, a crude dashboard that maps
Facebook friendship connections made “just yesterday” between people
across three conflict zones: Israel/Palestine, Russia/Ukraine, and
India/Pakistan.
To my surprise, support coalesces quickly around Joel Kaplan’s
suggestion of a Facebook initiative to support the military. Joel joined
Facebook around the same time I did. He’s a Harvard grad and ex-marine
who clerked after law school for Antonin Scalia and served as deputy chief
of staff for George W. Bush. But as with Marne, I suspect the real
qualification that ensured his hire was his relationship with Sheryl. The two
met at the first night of Harvard orientation, they dated, she thanked him in
her Harvard thesis, and they remained close over the years. His transition to
the tech world from his role as a political operative and lobbyist has been
bumpy. For weeks he turned up for work at Facebook in the DC uniform of
chinos and blue blazer with gold buttons before realizing this was out of

step with the guys in the office, who wore jeans, T-shirts, and hoodies. He
gradually downshifted to a series of dad jeans and blazers before relenting
to just dad jeans and a button-down shirt. He’s a man of routine. Every day
his assistant orders the same salad and every day he sits in meetings picking
the olives out of the salad. When I ask why he doesn’t just order it without
olives, he gives me a look like “You’ll never understand” and says nothing.
The team starts to map out specifics around what an initiative to support
the military would consist of, and how much it would cost.
“Errrr—this is a US-only initiative, right?” I ask tentatively.
I’m the only non-American in the DC policy team and it feels lonely. So
many of Facebook’s day-to-day policy decisions are underpinned by a
subterranean value system that I’m still learning.
“Nope—global,” Marne responds.
“Well, um—it’s just people and governments are still trying to figure
out what Facebook is about, and I don’t think we want to immediately align
with the military.”
“Wrong,” Joel responds. “Military and veteran issues are sure winners.
Here and everywhere.”
“The first political action Facebook takes globally is military? State
force? Maybe that makes sense in America, but there are countries that have
a more complex relationship with state force. Countries where there have
been military dictatorships, for example.…”
“Don’t you love our troops, Sarah?” Joel interrupts.
“You’re asking me, personally? Umm, yes. Of course. My point has
nothing to do with me. I’m saying—even if you leave out countries whose
military propped up dictators, if you just take the US military, not all
countries feel great about the US military. Especially in some of the regions
I’m responsible for, like Latin America and Asia. Vietnam, for example. Do
you need me to explain why the Vietnamese do not love the US military?”
Without clear agreement, the whole initiative is abandoned. That is,
until weeks later when Marne casually drops into conversation that
Facebook’s first proactive initiative to build relationships with governments
around the world will be organ donation.

Body parts and personal decisions about what to do with them after
death wouldn’t have been the issue that I would have led with—any more
than the military—if I wanted to show leadership and forge relationships
with foreign governments, but there wasn’t any discussion about this. Like
many things at Facebook, it didn’t matter what the policy team debated or
decided; it mattered what Sheryl thought. In this case she had run into one
of her Harvard friends, a surgical director of liver transplantation, at a
Harvard reunion and offered to help him source donors.
I’m instructed to work with engineers to set it up. I don’t know how to
set up a global organ donation initiative. And the obstacles pile up quickly.
Organ donation is not a universal practice. It’s discouraged by some
religions, some countries don’t do it at all, and some make it impossible to
distinguish legitimate organ donation from the sale of human organs. In
others there are even darker issues of organ theft and trafficking.
In one of the first meetings with Sheryl to update her on the project, it
becomes clear that we have different visions about the scope of the
initiative and the regulatory framework around organ donation more
generally.
The team of ten people working on the organ donation initiative are
gathered in her meeting room at Facebook’s headquarters. I’m nervous. I
know my push for having Facebook stand for something in the world and
what I bring to Facebook are both about to be tested by Sheryl. I walk her
through what we’ve come up with, explaining that it’s more like a
“registration drive” to push people to their local donation sites, and that
Facebook wouldn’t be matching donors with patients or transporting organs
around the world. We won’t build our own organ or patient registries or
gather detailed health information. In fact, we’ll try to limit the information
Facebook collects and holds. Sheryl seems baffled by this and fixates on
why we haven’t designed the initiative in a way that would allow Facebook
to play a bigger role in the collection of data, marketplace of organs, and
more. I start to explain the legal, cultural, and religious complexity around
organ donation globally, and the sensitivity of the information that organ
registries hold. She looks at me as if I am a complete idiot and have missed
the obvious, which I suppose I have. I wasn’t looking at this as a business

opportunity, a way to start collecting health data from users. Sensing
danger, I pivot to the risk of organ trafficking. I explain that countries have
put a lot of thought into safeguarding organ donation information and
guarding against cross-border transportation of organs.
She turns to me, indignant. The edge in her voice is unmistakable.
“Do you mean to tell me that if my four-year-old was dying and the
only thing that would save her was a new kidney, that I couldn’t fly to
Mexico and get one and put it in my handbag?”
I look around the meeting room for support, not sure whether she is
clueless or confused. Usually she’s so savvy. But it strikes me she’s serious
and she’s someone who’s used to getting what she wants. Everyone in the
room avoids eye contact with both of us, even Marne and Debbie, my usual
protectors. I realize that in delivering bad news, I’m the prey that’s been
separated from the herd.
“Ah, that’s right,” I say, with as much solicitousness as I can muster.
“Countries generally have strict regulations in place to prevent black-
market sales or theft or illegal harvesting of organs or body parts more
generally. It’s usually something determined by government policy rather
than who can pay the most.”
Sheryl glowers at me. I can feel her estimation of me drop as her
indignation rises. There’s a long, tense moment of silence.
Marne jumps in to save me. “Usually when Facebook releases new
features, once the code is pushed, there’s not a lot of thought to the real-
world consequences. But organ donation requires us to think through all the
relevant rules and laws in every country, plus we’ll have to create
partnerships with organ registries everywhere. We don’t have the resources
to do that sort of work for every country in the world.”
In fact, the natural instincts of the Facebook team—collect data, use a
uniform approach in every country and refuse to deviate from it—aren’t
going to work with organ donation. Marne points all this out to Sheryl, who
reluctantly agrees to scale back the global launch to just four countries.
She is not pleased.
But she’s undeterred. She wants to do everything possible to make this a
success, this first project to spotlight Facebook’s values. So, a few weeks

later, she directs the company’s engineers to add “registered as an organ
donor” to the list of “life events” in people’s Facebook profiles, alongside
other, more traditional life events like “got married” and “expecting a
baby.” Sheryl also directs me and the organ donation team to include a
megaphone—a pop-up that will dominate the screen for anyone who logs
on to Facebook—telling them about the organ donation tool. The engineers
aren’t sold on this idea.
They don’t think Facebook should be using the platform to push people
to do anything—donate their organs, vote, eat more vegetables, floss, adopt
stray puppies, anything. I agree with them. If we get into the business of
advocacy, we’ll have to make all sorts of choices about what causes
Facebook does and does not support. We’ll very quickly find ourselves in a
world of impossible choices. This whole organ donation thing feels cursed.
And a strange place to choose to confront these questions. When we
gathered to decide what Facebook stood for, this definitely was not what I
was hoping for.
And everyone in this conversation knows the stakes here. We know that
when Facebook encourages people to do things, it seems to work. During
the 2010 midterm elections in the United States, Facebook did an
experiment in driving voter turnout. We put a message at the top of the
newsfeed encouraging people to vote, with a link to polling places, and an
“I voted” button they could click, as part of a gigantic, randomized trial
(with a control group). A study later published in Nature showed that 61
million people saw the button, and it actually changed people’s behavior: it
led an additional 340,000 people to vote.
Sheryl hopes the same thing will happen with organ donation. But the
engineers have made their concerns known to Mark and they say he agrees
with them. Given the hierarchy at Facebook, where engineers always get
their way—they’re much more important than Sheryl’s teams—I assume
this pretty much kills the organ donation project, which Mark always
seemed lukewarm on. Now that the engineers have pulled him in, he’ll kill
it.
And so now, for the first time, I’m leading a project that includes both
Mark and Sheryl. It’s the first time Mark’s been involved in any policy

project and it’s not going well. I’m anxious about all of it. Facebook, like
any company, is a web of relationships, and I really want to develop strong
relationships with both Mark and Sheryl. I want them to like me. I want to
become one of their trusted advisers. But this isn’t the way to do it. This
whole project was a bad idea from the start. So I’m relieved the project is
dying.
But things take a turn for the worse. Sheryl really wants the megaphone.
Even though she knows Mark doesn’t. And she has a solution. She directs
me to send an email to the whole team, including Mark, announcing that
we’re moving forward with the megaphone, and explaining Sheryl’s point
of view as if it’s my own. I try and fail to convince her that it’s not a good
idea. She’s having none of it. This is my job. If I can’t write this email, what
use am I to her?
It all comes to a head while Sheryl is on a private jet crossing the country.
She steps onto the plane early one morning. As instructed, I send my email
dutifully setting out arguments I do not agree with that valiantly champion
the use of the megaphone for organ donation. Mark responds with a series
of withering attacks, underpinned by his strong belief that Facebook must
be a “neutral platform” and we should never use “Facebook’s voice” to
interrupt people’s experience on the platform. I defend Sheryl’s position,
against my better judgment. Mark is brutal, and will hear none of it. Sheryl
is silent. Later she’ll tell me she missed the exchange because she didn’t
have Wi-Fi.
I’ll never know whether she did—some of those traveling with her told
me that of course the private jet had Wi-Fi—or whether she told me to send
the email that morning knowing that she’d have a plausible reason to sit out
on the exchange with Mark.
All I know is that I received my very first direct email from Mark
Zuckerberg that day, one sent only to me. It was four words long and simply
said:
“I am overruling you.”


7
Show Him a Good Time
As we approach April 2012, I get an assignment from Elliot: to take Javier
Olivan to Cartagena to show him a good time. I’m expected to do this at a
venue that’s not really known as a rollicking party: the Summit of the
Americas, a gathering of presidents and prime ministers. I’d pitched that
Mark go, to meet heads of state and start establishing relationships with
them. Elliot nixes that and tells me to take Javi instead. The IPO is going to
happen next month. Lots of Facebook employees will make millions. Many
have already announced that they’re leaving. (I’m oversimplifying only a
little to say they divide into two camps: those who want to create their own
start-ups and those who want to become DJs.) When you’re a company that
doesn’t make or own something tangible, the threat that the most valuable
thing you have—your talented employees—might just up and leave is a
pretty big deal. Leadership is freaking out that certain key people might
decide to go, and first among them is probably Javi.
I pitch my policy strategy for the summit to Elliot. He barely listens; a
smile plays on his lips the whole time. “Just make sure Javi has a good
time. Make sure he comes back from Cartagena wanting to stay at
Facebook.” It’s not clear what exactly he wants me to do with Javi to make
him so happy. It’s just the two of us traveling to Colombia. There’s
definitely a weird vibe to the whole thing. But I choose to ignore that.
Javi’s one of the most important people at Facebook—one of Mark’s top
lieutenants, almost as powerful as Sheryl—but he has no public profile.
People don’t know him.

He’s really like no one else in senior management. For starters, he’s not
American. In his late thirties, he’s got close-cropped hair and a pronounced
Spanish accent. An avid surfer, he developed a competitor to Facebook in
his native Spain in his spare time. It was good enough for Mark to hire him
rather than deal with the competition. A forceful, no-bullshit guy, but with a
sense of humor.
And he’s got a big job. He’s in charge of Facebook’s global growth. His
growth team is the capitalist engine of the whole enterprise. Facebook’s
business model depends on it conquering new territories. Expanding
exponentially.
The growth team is in charge of forging those new frontiers, and like
most frontiersmen, Javi and his team play fast and loose. They’re
aggressive and quick to stake their claim, always looking for opportunities
in the gray area created by the lack of regulation.
Javi’s team is the group that came up with the idea of importing your
contacts into Facebook—so Facebook could press nonusers to join the
service. In the beginning, they didn’t ask permission to do this. You could
tell Facebook “don’t take my contacts” but then when you opened
Messenger, they’d take them by default. And his team is instrumental in the
development of the “People You May Know” tool, which is described by
Mashable as Facebook’s “creepy as hell tool” for its ability to make
uncomfortable friend recommendations, such as when a sperm donor was
recommended a biological child he had never met.
It’s a growth-at-all-costs approach. To me, it seems like a very
American thing. When Alexis de Tocqueville visited the US in the
nineteenth century, he was on a rickety steamboat that hit a sandbar and
capsized, and he nearly drowned. Afterward he found the manufacturers
and asked them why they didn’t make the vessels safer. They explained that
technological innovation in America happened so quickly there was no
point; by the time they made the necessary changes, the boats would be
obsolete anyway. Better just to take a chance on what you have. If some
drown, no need to dwell, safe in the knowledge that something better is just
around the corner. That cheerful recklessness combined with passivity, that
forward motion without introspection, that’s what Javi’s team has.

When we start to run into politicians who put up roadblocks to our
expansion, the growth team is quick to suggest that we “juice” the
algorithm to help them bolster their Facebook presence. The way they put
that? “Let’s dial up the algorithm to give politicians some love.” When they
say that to me, I always say no, believing it’s best for us in the long run to
stay scrupulously neutral. I don’t know what the other people on the policy
team tell them. But that’s the growth team’s mentality. Like the posters all
over the office say: move fast and break things.
Before I started working at Facebook, I didn’t know enough to imagine
the truth about the place, that this is the beating heart of the company, the
growth team. Their values are the company’s values. Their priorities are the
company’s. Those boys in the office who wanted to know what we stand
for? This is what we stand for. Growth. More.
Obviously, I understand that in the history of the world, this conquering
mentality has generally not worked out so well for everyone. And I know
Javi’s team is perfectly happy to bend the rules, to the extent that rules
exist. But I figure, we’re new, that’ll work itself out. Excesses will be
curbed. And the product Javi’s promoting so aggressively—Facebook—
seems benevolent. We’re helping people connect, not selling missiles or
nerve gas.
Javi’s street smart in a way that Mark isn’t. He’s the guy who first alerts
Mark to a new app called Snapchat. The way Javi tells it, he shows it to
Mark and asks him, “You know what people are gonna use this for?”
thinking the answer is obvious. Mark has no idea. Javi has to explain it:
sexting.
So. This is the man my bosses want to stay at Facebook, and I’m
supposed to make sure this trip to Colombia aids that cause.
Within weeks I’m walking down Cartagena’s cobbled streets to collect
Javi for the grand opening dinner with all the heads of state. It’s being held
in a breathtaking sixteenth-century fortress. Javi’s tickled to be there. It
feels important. He loves that they sent him, he loves the pomp and
circumstance, he loves that everyone is speaking Spanish. He loves the
whole thing.

Then we show up at the grand dinner, and no seats have been assigned
to Facebook.
This kind of treatment isn’t unusual. During this period, wherever we
go, most government officials don’t know what Facebook is or don’t really
use it or don’t care. They don’t want to meet. Facebook is not a big deal.
Still adjusting to nondiplomatic life, I’ve mistakenly prepared as if
Facebook will be treated as a government. It is not.
So we spend the evening standing near where the food is being
prepared, watching the politicians eat, milling about with assistants,
handlers, and security. Desperate to succeed in my mission to keep Javi
happy, I occasionally break from milling around to stalk down people who
have mild to no interest in speaking with anyone from Facebook. The
awkward conversations that follow definitely do not help. Javi, to his credit,
is relaxed. He’s never been to a head of state dinner before and is eager to
soak it all in. Once I find some beers, we spend most of the evening
catching up, pausing only when we spot famous politicians or celebrities.
The next day, on a bike ride I organize in the spirit of showing Javi a good
time, Javi—with no prompting from me—starts to talk about his future. As
Elliot suspected, the IPO is weighing on him. He, like me, sees the
possibility of what Facebook could become and is genuinely excited by
that. But people he respects at Facebook are leaving. Given his
entrepreneurial bent, he’s itching to prove himself on his own terms. To go
and start something. He wants to do both—to stay and to leave. But leaving
seems more likely. That’s not good news for me, with my assignment to
keep him at Facebook.
It’s a pleasant day of cycling to beaches and cafés, except for my
growing fear that there’s nothing I can do to convince Javi not to quit. Soon
enough, it’s back to work. I secured the slot for Javi’s keynote right before
the highest-profile session, which features the heads of state of Colombia,
Brazil, Canada, and the United States, President Obama. This felt like a real
coup. Javi was excited too. Unlike Mark, he enjoys the buzz of being in
front of a crowd. But as he’s about to take the stage, the audience surges

from our auditorium to the one next door, in order to secure their seats for
the session with the heads of state. Javi is left to address an almost empty
auditorium containing the small handful of people who are interested in this
strange thing called Facebook.
After the speech is over I apologize. It’s clear to both of us that I messed
up by booking him into the session before the heads of state. But he’s not a
dick about it. He’s mainly relieved that his keynote is done. He shrugs and
suggests we blow off being ignored at another official dinner, inviting me to
come out with his friends.
I meet up with them at a restaurant a few hours later. It takes a bit to
piece together everyone who’s there—mainly CEOs from some of the
region’s tech companies. Then a striking, tall man with dark features sits
beside me and starts to play the role of host. This is Juan del Mar. The
balmy sea air, cold beers, delicious food, and animated conversation fade to
the background when Juan takes the stage now and then to croon jazz with
the band. This is a surprise given that I thought the host was a tech CEO,
but Javi explains that he owns this restaurant. That’s when I notice—“Juan
del Mar” is emblazoned across the restaurant and the menus.
“Actually, he’s a bullfighter,” Javi says, scanning my face for a reaction.
“And he’s dabbled in a few other things.”
“He’s kind of built for it,” one of the CEOs says cryptically. I’m the
only woman there except for one of the CEO’s wives, who seems to be in
on the joke.
“I think he was hoping to show you,” someone else pipes up, and
everyone laughs. Except me.
As they continue drinking into the night, with Juan occasionally taking
the stage to sing, the men keep coming back to this in-joke that I’m not
understanding. They ask if I’m really engaged, because my engagement
ring is “so small it was very hard to tell.” Which is about the ring and also
somehow about sex, money, power, and availability, but I couldn’t exactly
say how. The men enjoy my confusion and switch into Spanish whenever
they want to say something about me. One of the things they definitely
seem to be saying to Javi: nice job you have there, that they send this girl to
hang out with you here in Cartagena.

Meanwhile, my mind is still racing, trying to figure out if any of this is
going to make Javi stay at Facebook. Is this what I signed up for? Is this
mission even possible? How can I get this done?
After midnight, someone suggests we head to a salsa club. Seemingly
out of nowhere, large, dark executive vehicles, ones I’m used to seeing for
heads of state, pull up. We’re bundled in and quickly skirting the back
alleys of Cartagena in the dark night. We speed into increasingly gritty
neighborhoods. After all the drinks, things start to blur a little.
We pull up to an unremarkable door. Stepping out into the warm air of
the unlit backstreets of Colombia feels illicit. I vacillate between excitement
and apprehension. We’re swept by someone’s security team into a hot,
crowded room where salsa music blares. Some strong unidentifiable drink
is thrust into my hand and I’m pulled onto the dance floor by one of the
CEOs or a bullfighter, it’s hard to know who. After a few songs, Javi makes
his way toward me. He leans in to say something in my ear that I think I’ve
misunderstood because it sounds like, “Hillary Clinton is here.”
“Oh, Javi.” I smile. It’s clear that some combination of the drinks and
the excitement of the summit, being around all these heads of state, has
gone to his head. “There’s no Hillary Clinton here. We’re in some random
back-alley salsa club. It’s way past midnight, the floor is sticky, there’s a
half-naked woman right over there, and I promise you there is no chance
that the US secretary of state is here. She’s somewhere fast asleep.…”
Javi cuts me off by taking my hand and pulling me over to the edge of
the club.
And there she is. Hillary Clinton. Beer in hand, next to the band,
dancing with a small group of her staff, security detail conspicuous with
their earpieces in the steamy club.
Javi looks at me, triumphant. “Hillary Clinton!”
It is undeniably Hillary Clinton. She’s completely caught up in the
music, right in the front, clapping and swinging her hips. I take in every
strange detail of that sight and turn to look at Javi. The delight in his face at
having bested me is contagious, and I take a slug of whatever sticky drink
I’m holding.

“You’re right and I apologize and will forever defer to your superior
knowledge of foreign policy. I should never have doubted you.”
He’s beaming.
“Now you have to tell me the real deal about Juan del Mar,” I shout
over the dance floor.
“Okay,” he says slowly. “He’s a bullfighter, he owns bars and
restaurants, and he’s kind of an actor. He’s what every man here wants to
be.”
“I still don’t get it.”
“Well, he’s a special type of actor.”
I turn my head from Hillary Clinton to look closer at Juan del Mar. “You
mean he’s an adult actor?”
At that moment Juan raises his glass in toast to us. Hillary Clinton
dances behind him, just a few feet away.
“Yeah, I guess he’s a porn star,” Javi says.
“Are you going to quit?” I hadn’t dared ask outright the entire time
we’d been in Colombia but decide in the moment to rip the bandage off. I
need to know if I’ve failed or succeeded. I don’t even know if Javi knows
the real reason he’s here in Colombia.
“I don’t know,” he says, looking over at Hillary Clinton, seeming to
weigh her presence in his head.
The music rolls over us and the dance floor pulses. Javi drains his drink,
pulls me into the fray, and gestures for Juan to join us. We edge as close as
we can get to Hillary Clinton.
“Just want to be sure,” I say, leaning toward his ear. “Are you going to
stay at Facebook?”
“I think I’ll stay for now,” he says, speaking more to himself than to me.
As I write this, it’s more than a decade later. He’s still there. Running
the place with Mark, now as Facebook’s chief operating officer.

8
Running Out of Road
Before long—October 2012—we’re celebrating one billion people using
Facebook. The festivities are really targeted at the lower-level employees.
They get parties. Shiny silver and blue balloons—Bs and ones and zeros—
float all around the office.
But for top management, one billion users is a crisis.
I’m in meeting after meeting where my bosses agonize about how we’re
“running out of road.” That’s the phrase they use. Facebook’s stock has
dropped by half in just five months, from thirty-eight dollars a share at the
IPO—when shares were first offered to the public—to nineteen dollars now.
They believe that the only way the stock price will rise is if we show
growth, dramatic growth. But as Javi explains, the first billion users are the
easy billion. He says it like everyone knows that. After that, you get into
issues like how to reach children, how to reach parts of the world where
there’s no internet, how to get into places like China that are hostile to any
social media site like Facebook.
Now, with our stock price falling, Facebook’s survival depends on
growth. As a result, countries outside the US become of vital importance.
Before this, my work wasn’t seen as something that would impact the share
price. But now, getting past foreign regulators and opening up markets is
the most important thing. Suddenly I matter.
And I’ve been busy. In the six months since Cartagena, I’ve been flying
into countries to be the first person from Facebook that the government
meets. I hand over a business card to the most senior member of the

government I can wrangle a meeting with. Mexico, Vietnam, Brazil,
Argentina, Colombia, Singapore, Canada, and probably a dozen other
places. I let them know that if they’ve got a problem, I’m the person to call.
If there’s a problem already, I try to find the person behind the problem and
solve it. I show them how the part of Facebook they’re worried about works
or how they could prepare rules or guidelines for it.
Sometimes, my bosses and I don’t agree on the solution. We tussle over
the issue of educating politicians and regulators who don’t under- stand the
complexities of our technology. When the Canadian privacy commissioner
asks for information about the “People You May Know” tool on Facebook,
wondering if it violates Canadian privacy rules, I’m ready to explain. I want
to help. Marne and Elliot thought I was mad. “Why do you want to break
into jail?” Marne asked.
As the teams start to look around the world at where they can pick up
significant numbers of new users, Myanmar comes into focus. The way Javi
and the growth team see it, there are more than sixty million potential new
Facebook users there, largely untapped. But just as they start to hone in on
it, the military junta that runs Myanmar blocks Facebook. We have no idea
why. Maybe it’s because on Facebook the junta is finally facing criticism,
something it’s never tolerated before. But at the same time, Myanmar’s in
the process of democratizing. It’s headed toward its first democratic
elections in over a decade. Why ban us now?
In the past, this would have been met at Facebook with the same
indifference as the blocks in Iran, Cuba, Bangladesh, and North Korea. But
with the pressure for more “road” and the lure of sixty million potential new
users, this quickly escalates into something for top managers to address.
Javi explains his agitation to the small group of policy executives on a
call. “It’s the network effect,” he says, meaning that increasing use will
improve Facebook in Myanmar. As people are first getting the internet,
getting them on Facebook from the start leads to exponential growth. If
we’re not available some other service will capture the value of the network
effect. “Being blocked right now is a disaster. How quickly can we get this
fixed?”

“They shut us down, we’re completely in the dark, and it’s hard to tell
what’s going on from here,” I reply. “Military juntas usually want to control
communications. I’m not sure we can convince this one to just be cool with
Facebook. I don’t think there’s a quick fix.”
“Nope—that doesn’t work,” Javi responds. “Someone needs to get on
the ground and figure out what’s going on.”
“And fix this law,” Marne says, referring to a law that had recently been
drafted giving the junta formal power to shut down Facebook. “Otherwise
this is going to become the new normal.”
There’s silence and I let it hang in the air. No one from Facebook has
ever been there. The junta is still in charge. The country is barely online.
“Oh, you mean I should go to Myanmar?” I say eventually. “Should I
stop off in North Korea on the way home?”
“Yeah,” said Javi, not rising to my bait. “But more importantly, don’t
come back until you’ve sorted it out.”
I really don’t want to do this.
Days later I’m heading toward the center of the capital Nay Pyi Taw, on a
desolate twenty-lane highway that’s completely empty of cars. There’s no
way the average citizen in Myanmar can afford one, and there’s speculation
that the highway can double as a runway if junta leaders ever need to
escape. Like an ornate castle from a fairy tale, the Presidential Palace in
Nay Pyi Taw shimmers in the heat of the day, looming above the deserted
road.
Nay Pyi Taw is a planned city, and it’s a lot like this highway: nice on
paper but weirdly empty. Occasionally, I catch glimpses of women with
chalked faces carrying children in their arms or on their backs, workers
sweeping the empty roads with long straw brushes, men cycling on bikes
loaded with wood or produce. They all look like actors who’ve strayed onto
an empty set.
My hotel is extremely basic. Miles out of the city down a rugged dirt
track, surrounded by scrubby fields. The hotel lobby is also the owner’s
living room. No electricity, hot water, or food available, and absolutely no

internet or cell service. That makes setting up meetings basically
impossible.
But the World Economic Forum (WEF) is holding a regional meeting in
Myanmar. I’ve registered in the hope that I can connect with someone there
who can provide a link to the junta. Despite coming from a country of fewer
than four million people, I’ve found there usually is at least one New
Zealander in even the most unlikely of places, and they’re usually friendly
and sometimes helpful. So I set out to find one, scanning the list of
participants, which usefully includes everyone’s home country. Bingo. The
Kiwi I latch onto gets me into WEF events, including a party that feels like
a portal to another time and place. A sumptuous feast in a giant tent in what
feels like the middle of nowhere. There are tables groaning with exquisite
food, limitless champagne, and musicians in flowing silks on stilts. It’s
grotesque in its excess, and the WEF guests seem oblivious to the abject
poverty that’s just outside.
It turns out that WEF would be a great place to meet an overconfident
European corporate man in his late fifties. It’s no place to meet members of
the junta. And when I broach the idea of setting up meetings between
Facebook and the junta, these men laugh, stare blankly, or warn me against
the idea.
“You’re in their bad books,” a human rights lawyer says to me. “And
you don’t want to meet with the junta when you’re in their bad books.”
I use WEF’s Wi-Fi to arrange a different hotel and message Tom—who
I’ve not contacted yet—to tell him, “My phone does not work in Myanmar.
No coverage. No data. Will call as soon as you might be waking up. Sorry
for any concern, I didn’t expect this. Love you. Sarah x.”
I also start trying to connect with Aung San Suu Kyi. The Nobel Prize
winner is leading the opposition party that secured significant victories in
recent by-elections. I want to find out if she and her team have thought
about the role Facebook could play in helping Myanmar open up and
transform into a democracy. But reaching her is about as easy as connecting
with the junta.
After her assistant politely informs me that I will not be getting a
meeting now or ever, I learn that she’ll be attending a WEF luncheon in her

honor. I get there early, walking in while the catering staff sets up, before
WEF starts policing the guest list. My diplomatic training helps me locate
the seating plan. Then it’s simply a matter of plonking myself down at her
table and waiting to see if anyone will remove me.
When Aung San Suu Kyi arrives hours later, she’s elegant and more
feminine than I expected. She sits with poise among the circle of men now
assembled at her table, with a large fresh flower in her hair. Among the
CEOs and politicians there’s an unspoken competition to command Aung
San Suu Kyi’s attention. I am ignored. Meanwhile, I’m using all my limited
energy, which is rapidly flagging due to jet lag, to act like I belong at that
table, worried that at any moment someone will realize I’m not even on the
guest list.
I’m so tired I can’t even see straight, and as things slowly come into
focus I see Aung San Suu Kyi looking at me. She gestures and I look beside
me to see who she’s granted an audience to, before realizing that it’s me.
She says across the table, “Come.”
The heads of the gray men rapidly swivel and I meekly get up and walk
around to assume a half crouch beside her.
“I noticed you,” she says warmly.
“I’m Sarah. I’m from New Zealand,” I say reflexively, still groggy from
jet lag, and then am overcome with embarrassment. “I mean, I’m from
Facebook, but I’m also from New Zealand.…” Aung San Suu Kyi looks
confused. “… But I live in the US.” This is not going well.
She gracefully taps the person beside her in a gray tunic. “I want to
introduce you to Shwe Mann, who is soon to be the Speaker in Parliament.”
“Hi, I’m Sarah. I’m here on behalf of Facebook,” I say quickly,
determined to make a better impression.
“I’m sorry, I do not speak English,” he says. As I look closer at his well-
pressed clothes, short-cropped hair, and impeccable posture, I realize that he
may be the first person I’ve encountered from the junta. In the silence, he
assumes I haven’t understood and repeats, “My English it is not very good.”
“Oh, no, it’s great,” I reassure him, “and I’m sorry, I do not speak
Burmese.” He smiles politely. “And in fact some people think I don’t speak
English very well because of my New Zealand accent.”

“I apologize,” Aung San Suu Kyi cuts in. “You have a beautiful New
Zealand accent, and I apologize for not speaking Maori.”
Maori’s the indigenous language of New Zealand.
“I’m actually here to talk about communicating,” I say, smiling. “The
way people and politicians are starting to communicate on the internet.
Facebook, do you know what that is?”
“Yes,” Aung San Suu Kyi interrupts. “Did you know Shwe Mann is
very important in our country? We’re from different parties but we have
forged a wonderful working relationship.”
She’s trying to warn me. Whatever you say to me, you’re saying to the
junta. I try to carry on but she continues.
“His party and ours. We’re trying to find ways we can work together.
There’s so much to do. And he is the right man to do it. Very clever.”
Shwe Mann beams.
“I am conscious of how much you have to do. I think Facebook is going
to play a role in Myanmar’s future. I think it’s important that we figure out
some of the issues that are coming up, especially with the blocking, the new
telecommunications law, and the upcoming election.” I pause, fearing I’ve
overreached.
“You really from Facebook?” Shwe Mann interrupts. I nod vigorously
to ensure no misunderstanding on that basic point.
“Wow,” he says, touching my face gently just to make sure I’m real.
When I return to my new hotel that night, there’s a written message in
my room letting me know that I have a meeting at the Ministry of
Communications set for the next morning.
I’d picked the new hotel I transferred to because it advertised access to
internet. In reality, there’s no Wi-Fi, though for some reason there is a book
next to the bed titled How to Use the Internet. The next morning I discover
a rotary phone; strangely, you can’t dial out, people have to call you. But
these are far from my biggest problems. I have a 10:00 A.M. meeting starting
soon with the deputy minister and no idea how I’m going to get there.
Overwhelmed by WEF chaos, the hotel staff are unable to help with
transport. With little other choice, I walk alone down the road in full
business attire and ponder whether the traditional hitchhiking thumbs-out

sign will work in Myanmar, or whether I’d be better off waving money to
try to incentivize a ride. Not that I have local currency. And there are no
cars on the road. Those barren highways are still empty.
Then a car comes barreling toward me and I stand, one arm
outstretched, dangling an American twenty-dollar bill, the other arm in an
enthusiastic thumbs-up. The driver doesn’t even slow down. Completely
ignores my friendly New Zealand smile. In the long silence that follows, I
think about the damage it’ll do to Facebook’s relationship with the junta if I
fail to show up to this meeting that I was lucky to get in the first place. And
how I’ll explain to my bosses why I failed to fix Facebook’s situation. Javi
was clear that I shouldn’t come back until this is solved. Saying I couldn’t
get a cab won’t cut it.
I keep checking the time on my otherwise useless phone. Eventually I
see a speck in the distance coming closer. It’s an old car. I decide to take
drastic action and step out onto the highway to stop the car.
The middle-aged Burmese driver is confused and winds down his
window. I lean in, waving my American money, and hit my next stumbling
block: he doesn’t speak English and I don’t speak Burmese.
With no alternative, I mime driving and attempt to pass the money to
him, and when he doesn’t take it I mime again, with more determination.
He seems to get it this time and accepts the money. I get into the front seat
and quickly fasten the seat belt before he can change his mind. He starts to
drive and, with no other cars on the road, we make a quick pace. He’s
speaking to me rapidly in Burmese and I realize he’s asking where I want to
go. I try saying “Ministry of Transport and Communications” three times
but it doesn’t work. I take out paper and pen from my handbag and
carefully write the name of the department before remembering that
Burmese has a different script, so this is as worthless as my phone without
internet. After repeating the name of the ministry hopelessly and seeing a
cloud of confusion start to stretch across his earnest face, I return to
miming. I’m at a complete loss for what else to do. I mime driving, then
answering a telephone, and then draw a square box in the air, which is as
close as I can get to “government ministry.” When he still looks unsure, I do

it again. Eventually, he nods and turns off the highway into a denser area
with more buildings but still mostly devoid of people.
He slows as we approach a collection of shops and nods at me earnestly
before pulling to a stop outside one of them. This is clearly not a
government ministry. It looks like some kind of empty internet café. I have
to hand it to him: given my mime, that’s a pretty good guess. But it’s not
where I need to be. I shake my head no, but try to smile encouragingly. He
responds with a worried look like, “Uh oh—how do I get this foreigner out
of my car?” Meanwhile, I’m panicked that I’m going to have to leave his
car in this random place and lose my only shot of making it to the ministry.
I belatedly remember that the government is a junta, and mime
regimented marching and saluting before redoing the previous mime.
Miraculously, he seems to get it and we set off. But while he may or may
not understand where I want to go, it doesn’t seem like he knows how to get
there. I mean, he’s not a taxi driver. He’s just some punter whose car I stood
in front of. We start to drive into a more remote area, and fear surges
through my body. Not only because no one knows where I am, with no
form of outside communication, alone in a car with a Burmese man who
could drive off and take me wherever he wants without anyone knowing.
But also because my meeting is supposed to have already started and I don’t
know what the consequences are if I don’t show up.
We drive around what seems to be a circular business park, then turn
another corner, and unexpectedly I see a spartan building that looks like a
government ministry. A big concrete box that would look right at home in
downtown Beijing or a lesser Soviet republic. I’m late but so grateful to be
there. I thank my savior, who appears both relieved and genuinely excited
we made it, and race inside.
When I announce that I’m from Facebook, the receptionist shakes his head
in a way that makes me think I’m in trouble and not just for being late. He
requests something that I don’t understand. I hand over my business card
but that’s rejected, and then I realize he wants my passport. I hand it over
and he takes it and puts it in a drawer that he locks. Oh no. I decide not to

protest, but as he leads me upstairs and through a rabbit warren of sterile
corridors—and I feel myself moving farther and farther away from my
passport—I regret not taking a firmer stand on that one. He leads me into a
grand hall. It’s dark and somber like a Gothic cathedral. The scale of it is
ridiculous. I was expecting an office or conference room. There’s a large,
thick curtain, and the room is dominated by large, ornate chairs that look
like medieval thrones carved from dark wood. They line each side of the
room. Against the far wall, raised on a platform, are three even more ornate,
larger thrones. I feel tiny and instinctively want to stick by the door. But the
receptionist leads me over to a seat near the wooden thrones on the raised
stage and then leaves. I sit.
I’m alone in a place that could not be further from Silicon Valley. It’s
like some dimly lit feudal court. I check my phone, interested to see
whether the government department responsible for communications in
Myanmar has Wi-Fi or any form of cell phone reception.
Of course not.
Time passes slowly in the silence of the throne room. Suddenly, there’s
movement behind the curtains and a bright, blinding light bursts through. I
can’t see anything but this light pointed straight in my eyes. As it moves
toward me, I start to make out shapes and realize that a group of men are
approaching, one of them holding what looks like a large video camera,
another the large light, followed by more men in tunics. I am petrified. I’m
reminded of videos of ISIS captives that we’d debated removing from
Facebook, in comfortable, well-lit meeting rooms back in Silicon Valley.
The videos never included the moments before someone becomes a
hostage, but I guess this might be how they start.
As the camera moves steadily toward me, my mind starts replaying the
things people in Myanmar had said about how angry the junta is about
Facebook, and the trouble it was causing in Myanmar. I know that this junta
is vicious, committing human rights abuses with executions, torture, gang
rape, forced labor, and human trafficking. Not long before I arrived in
Myanmar, the possession and use of telephones, fax machines, computers,
modems, and software was a criminal offense. They’ve arrested people for
as little as listening to a foreign radio station.

I try to calmly and rationally calculate a safe route out. But beyond the
name of the ministry, I don’t know where I am. I’m outnumbered by these
men and I don’t know if I could wedge open the heavy ornate doors that
seal the throne room shut, much less navigate my way through a maze of
identical corridors to retrieve my passport. I’m now absolutely terrified. No
one knows where I am. No one is coming to help me. I can’t help but think
of how angry Tom will be if I become a hostage in Myanmar. He’d told me
it was crazy to come here.
Two men in frog-collar tunics peel off from the group and move toward
the raised thrones. The camera crew comes and stands beside me—
wordlessly—their light pointing directly in my face and their camera
drilling into me. I feel my heart pounding. I start to detect some kind of
mechanical grinding movement from within my chair and fear that some
handcuffs or footcuffs will emerge, but no—it’s a microphone that slowly
extends from somewhere noisily. In the half darkness I have no idea who’s
controlling it. I gulp down air and consciously direct my face away from the
camera and toward the two men in tunics. I make eye contact with the
closest one, who looks down at me from his raised throne. I can’t read his
expression.
He and the other man introduce themselves, and I strain to understand
their heavily accented English. They both have short dark hair, and one has
very bushy eyebrows. At least one of the men is the deputy minister of
information, though it’s possible that they both are. Their thrones are of
equal height. I introduce myself, speaking deliberately, conscious that it’s
all on film and may possibly be the introduction for a hostage video.
I’m surprised when the men respond in humorous disbelief. As if I’d
just crawled out of some hidden computer monitor.
“You are from the Facebook? You are from the internet?” one says.
I assure them I really am from Facebook and there really are people
who work there. When I sense at least one of them is unconvinced, I fish
around in my handbag and pull out a business card, which I hand to one of
the camera crew to walk over to the deputy ministers. Somehow it feels like
I should not leave my throne. The deputy ministers pore over it.

In truth, I don’t really know what to do next. This isn’t like a meeting
I’d prep for Sheryl or Marne to do, where I’d have scripted out a plan.
The men look at me expectantly.
My adrenaline-fueled fear starts to ebb away. Their looks of genuine
astonishment—their amusement—signal that maybe they aren’t going to
hold me against my will or do anything to me, at least not at first.
So I start with the basics. I ask them why they were blocking Facebook.
What were they worried about?
In halting English, they outline a scenario they’d never expected to face.
The junta had controlled the internet until recently, and they priced it so
very few people could afford to go online (it was $300 for a SIM card, if
you could find one). The infrastructure they’d built also let them do all the
surveillance and censorship they wanted. But now the country is opening up
—transitioning from military dictatorship to electoral democracy—and the
internet is moving to everyone’s phones. (This is new, for a country to go
online without a desktop phase.) They’re deciding whether to allow foreign
phone companies to come in and—in a broader way—they’re figuring out
how to handle the internet in this new semidemocratic Myanmar.
The men tell me that only 1 percent of the population has access to the
internet right now, but nearly all of them are on Facebook. With poor
connectivity and challenges navigating to other sites, it’s become the default
home page for the country. So Myanmar is discovering the internet in a
completely idiosyncratic way; it’s as if Facebook were the entire internet.
They explain their concern: that some people are intentionally fueling
ethnic tensions and sowing discord between Muslims and Buddhists by
posting things that are false on Facebook. Also, they’re worried people are
saying nasty things about the junta. The junta’s natural instinct—like that of
any authoritarian military dictatorship—is to control information at all
costs. Facebook and the internet are a profound challenge to this. So they do
what comes naturally. When there’s a problem on Facebook, they simply
switch it off.
No one on Facebook’s side has been tracking this closely, but the sense
I get from the deputy ministers of information is that they have been
switching Facebook on and off for years and basically Facebook hasn’t

cared, until the whole “running out of road” thing became an issue. The
transition to a pseudo civilian government and the growing access to the
internet and Facebook, to say nothing of Facebook’s growth ambitions,
mean this isn’t tenable in the long term, but they don’t have any other
solutions.
The deputy ministers make the arguments for banning Facebook
permanently, and I try to convince them that that won’t solve the
fundamental problems in Myanmar, arguing that their country has a lot to
gain from freer flows of information, outside state control. They know the
internet is coming to Myanmar. The political changes in their country mean
they won’t be able to keep it out forever. All we can agree on between us
is … to talk.
I ask that before they switch off Facebook again, they at least reach out
and explain the problem. But even that is complicated. They don’t know
how we could communicate. They don’t have working government email
addresses.
“But how would we do this?” they ask. “Could we call you on the
telephone?”
I joke that my phone isn’t working in Myanmar so it wouldn’t be a good
system. I wave my useless phone at them but they do not find this funny.
It’s like a curtain falls. I suddenly remember that I’m at the Ministry of
Communications. We’d been getting along—a little—and now it’s clear
I’ve offended them. One of the deputy ministers seems a little embarrassed;
the other is stern.
And with that, the meeting is over.
We agree to stay in touch, but don’t specify how. I leave thinking that,
for the moment at least, these two deputy ministers will support switching
Facebook back on. Unfortunately, they’re not the only ones that have to be
convinced.
I’m sent to meet other men in different locations—some spartan, some
that look like bunkers, some that are like Bond villains’ lairs, with too much
carpet and portraits of generals whose frames are encrusted with sparkling
rubies and garnets. I’m too nervous to ask if they’re real.

Many of the men are in traditional dress. Others are in full military
uniforms adorned with medals. All of them act like they’re used to being
obeyed and rapport is not part of their job description. The raw power they
project is clear and not obfuscated in the way you often get with officials
around the world. But somehow, we reach a tentative agreement to unblock
Facebook and to talk the next time before they decide to block it. Because
there will be a next time.
By the end of the day, I’m overwhelmed with a sense of absolute
exhaustion. It’s unlike anything I’ve ever felt before—like every molecule
in my body is heavy and yet I feel empty, dimly aware of a gnawing hunger,
hollow and unable to bring my brain into focus. It can’t just be jet lag, can
it? I limp toward my hotel room, feet blistering from the heels after walking
across unpaved roads and paths.
I’m writing up notes from the meetings when my rotary phone rings. It’s
a sound I haven’t heard in years. Like 1982’s calling. The receiver’s
cumbersome and heavy. I assume it’s the front desk calling about transport
to the airport the next day, and I’m surprised to hear Tom’s voice.
“I’ve been calling since I woke up. I haven’t heard from you since you
left for the airport days ago, apart from your email about the hotel saying
you would call me.” His anger’s palpable. Had he somehow found out I’d
been deep inside a government building with the junta and no one at
Facebook knew my whereabouts? That was impossible. Had he somehow
learned of the whole hostage confusion? Surely not.
“I’m sorry, I had no way to contact you. I can’t dial out on this phone. I
know that sounds crazy but it’s true. It only takes incoming calls. My
mobile doesn’t work in Myanmar, but I guess you know that, and it says
there’s internet here, but I haven’t been able to figure it out and I’ve barely
been in my room anyway.”
He cuts me off and his words tumble out in a flood of concern, anger,
and hurt. He’s telling me that the situation is ridiculous and untenable and
when am I coming home and he’s worried about me and why am I there,
and everything he says seems to blur together. But it’s unlike any
conversation we’ve had before. This time his anger has a new, insistent
edge.

Because I’m pregnant.
I was too scared to tell my bosses. I felt like I was still on trial for this
job they never wanted to create in the first place. I was sure it would count
against me if I told them. And I was certain they’d tell me to go anyway.
Marne is someone for whom work always comes first. I felt utterly
powerless.
And I didn’t want to be a whiner. I didn’t want to ask for special
treatment. I felt like I had a job to do and I had to get it done. That’s how I
was raised. You tough it out. Mind over matter, stop your hyperventilating.
Tom thought it was a terrible idea for me to do this trip, and when I
vanished for two days, well, of course that was hell for him.
I hang up and, in a daze, climb straight into the shower feeling an
unfamiliar mix of lonely, chastened, desperately unhappy, irresponsible, and
ashamed, knowing that the water will wash away the tears that are already
streaming down my face. I’m so used to trusting my instincts. Suddenly my
center of gravity is shifting. I don’t know if I’ve done anything right for
Tom or the junta or Facebook or my bosses at Facebook or Aung San Suu
Kyi or the people of Myanmar. I don’t know if Facebook is the right thing
or at least I don’t know if it’s the thing I thought it was. I’m hoping I’m
wrong. I’m at a bit of a loss because none of this feels right.
Of course there’s no hot water at the hotel. Crouched on the floor of the
tub, the cold water against my skin brings me out of my mind and back to
my body. I sit cross-legged under the cold water, sobbing, unable to stop.
Tom’s not being unreasonable. I get it. He was right and I was wrong.
Instinctively, I move my hand to my stomach, gently prodding and
feeling for signs of life from the baby that’s slowly growing inside me.

9
Lady McNugget
Lean In marks a new era in Facebook. When her book is published in
March 2013, Sheryl goes from COO to celebrity and everything is about the
book.
The line between Facebook work and Sheryl’s personal benefit had
always been blurry. Like the time I had to help her get tourist visas to
Australia for one of her nannies through my embassy connections. But the
book blasted this to a new level.
There’s a carefully orchestrated media campaign attached to the launch.
The women in the Washington, DC, office—there aren’t many of us—are
expected to help by doing menial tasks that suspiciously resemble the
“office housework” (administrative tasks that help your bosses but don’t
pay) that Sheryl rails against in her talks and a New York Times op-ed. Some
women grumble about having to give up our evenings to do free labor for
her book. It’s not like we’re short of work—in fact quite the opposite. We’re
fielding regular crises at all hours, in countries around the world. No one
ever explains why we have to help with the book. I guess it’s too crude to
tell us it’s because we share a gender.
My job is passing out name tags, a crushing exercise as I have to ask the
names of DC types who, mortally offended, look at me with a “don’t you
know who I am” face. Which I obviously don’t. When I’m released from
that task, I have to shadow Sheryl, holding her business cards so that she
can work the room unencumbered. My presence is acknowledged only

when she wants to do someone the honor of giving them her contact
information.
I make a point of catching Meredith’s eye every time I’m called over,
like a dog, to perform the trick of handing over Sheryl’s card. But I also
know that Sheryl thinks she’s doing me a favor, having me ride shotgun
with her through this power broker cocktail party. And it is kind of cool.
I’m glad to be there. It’s exciting whenever she’s around. We don’t have
women like Sheryl in New Zealand, and I like it whenever she breezes into
DC.
Watching her work is like a study in female success. How she comes to
decisions, her relationships with men—both the ones she works for and the
ones who work for her—what she wears, how she’s groomed, how she
speaks. She can drop into a soft girlish voice, like you’re sharing an
intimate secret with her, and yet still command a room. Sheryl’s amazing.
Lean In is based on eleven principles that basically boil down to: if a
woman works hard enough, she can thrive at home and at work. These
include:
Sit at the table: Sheryl admits to feeling “imposter syndrome” but
encourages women to “fake it till you make it.” She says that
women keep themselves from advancing because they don’t have
the self-confidence and drive that men do. “We lower our own
expectations of what we can achieve.”
Don’t leave before you leave: This is Sheryl’s belief that many
women tend to “quietly lean back” way before they have children,
worrying how they’ll manage family and work commitments.
And my favorites—they’re both about cultivating and nurturing honesty
in the workplace:
Seek and speak your truth: Sheryl explains how she’s tried to make
Facebook a nonhierarchical organization where everyone is free to
speak their thoughts and criticism.

Let’s start talking about it: Sheryl outlines barriers women still face
in the workplace, including “blatant and subtle sexism,
discrimination and sexual harassment,” and encourages women to
start talking about sexism in the workplace.
Over the coming years at Facebook, I’ll see both of those tested,
chewed up, and thrown aside. But at this point, they seem very real to me.
Around the office there’s a divide. Some of the older women think Lean
In is bullshit, a way to get more out of us for nothing. The younger staff are
uniformly starstruck by Sheryl’s celebrity. I’m somewhere in between the
two groups, closer to the younger staff. One of the lobbyists, a woman in
her forties, pulls me aside to say, “Don’t take the book seriously. It’s just a
way to make you feel bad about yourself. Which is what Sheryl does.” She
thinks I have stars in my eyes. I’m embarrassed to admit that maybe I do, so
I just nod.
At a Lean In roundtable for the dozen female DC staffers the day after
the book launch, we’re told we should be grateful for the opportunity to sit
with Sheryl. Which is true for some of us—the interns raise their hands to
volunteer how the book changed them and how they love her dress.
“Narciso,” she coos in response. Which, not knowing the designer, I
hear as “narcissism” and am very confused given the broader chat in the
office.
“Why a book and not something else like another TED talk or speech or
video?” one intern softballs from around the conference table, sidestepping
the fact that before Sheryl arrived, we’d all been discussing why she didn’t
post any of this stuff on Facebook.
“What a great question, an absolutely fantastic, insightful question,”
Sheryl responds, sparking a wave of thinly veiled jealousy around the room
among the interns. “Because I wanted to start a national conversation and
the best way to do that is a book. It’s the starting point for not just a
conversation, but a movement.”
Of course, Facebook claims proudly that it’s instrumental in starting
movements and conversations. And she’s the COO. But it seems clear to me

that she hates using the platform personally. Like most of Facebook’s senior
staff, Sheryl hardly ever posts.
Eventually, the women in the room stray from the book talking points
and start asking about Facebook. One of the younger women asks what the
biggest risk for Facebook is.
“Us,” Sheryl says. “The greatest threat to Facebook is us, it’s all of us.”
She sits back, taking in the shocked silence around the table. Then she
says, “I’ve seen this happen before. We, the company, get too confident, too
complacent. We think we know everything, that we have it all figured out.
“I worry about this for everyone, even me. I worry about the day when
people won’t tell me the truth straight. When they won’t have the hard
conversation with me. When I sit in a meeting and everyone will agree with
me. They won’t give me the bad news. They won’t challenge me. We are
our own greatest risk. All of us.”
I hang on every word. This seems like such impressive self-knowledge
and insight that I want to bottle it. I write it down thinking that we can add
it to her speeches elsewhere.
It’s unthinkable that we wouldn’t speak honestly with Sheryl or share
bad news. We say what needs to be said. She’s the champion of these “hard
conversations” telling people what they need to hear even if it feels difficult
to do so.
I underline “it’s all of us” three times.
Funny thing about Lean In: If you happen to be a youngish, pregnant-
looking woman who is the perfect visual accompaniment to some of the
book’s maxims—for example, “Don’t leave before you leave,” Sheryl’s
thesis that you should scale back at work only after a child arrives, not
before—you might find that your book duties extend beyond the launch
party. You may soon find yourself winging your way abroad as part of
Sheryl’s international book tour. I’m told I’m going to Japan.
Japan has always been a difficult country for Facebook. Our growth
rates there have never matched those in the rest of the world. The most
compelling theory is that Japan has a culture that doesn’t like sharing

personal information online. Facebook’s lack of popularity in Japan and the
fact that Sheryl is not CEO (visiting a country that is very conscious of
status and gender) meant that I was flummoxed when Sheryl announced she
wanted to meet Prime Minister Shinzo Abe as part of her book tour. How do
you casually set up a meeting with a head of state from a G7 country for a
tech company that is not even popular in that country, not to mention that
the meeting might also be a Trojan horse for book promotion? The answer, I
learn from trial and error, is that it’s a lot like getting my job at Facebook.
Basically I ask over and over until someone says they might be able to help.
I tell Abe’s office that Lean In will be helpful for his “womenomics”
agenda, which is trying to encourage Japanese women to stay in the
workforce, and trying to boost the percentage of women in leadership.
They buy it. Abe says yes.
We land in Tokyo and arrive at the flashiest hotel I’ve ever stayed at. It’s
humbling. Sheryl’s room at the Ritz-Carlton Japan is several times larger
than my apartment. She’s decided to bring her children and parents on this
trip. I’m excited to meet them until she requests that her parents accompany
us to meet Prime Minister Abe. So now I have two delightful retirees
looking forward to meeting the prime minister of Japan after they finish
their tea ceremony or whatever tourism activities they had planned. In my
time in the foreign service, I’d never seen a head of state show up with their
mom and dad, and I don’t really know how to handle this ridiculous
request. I call up my best friend, Bec, who used to work at the International
Court of Justice. Bec assures me she’s seen heads of state take meetings
with their families alongside them and I could just sneak Adele and Joel
Sandberg in. I ask where she’s seen this, who, and how.
“Robert Mugabe. I think he routinely takes meetings with members of
his family,” she says, laughing, before I hang up despondent, sure this will
be a disaster.
Fortunately, Abe’s office is categorical and says no parents can attend
the meeting with the prime minister of Japan. Sheryl begrudgingly accepts
this.
I may have already been looking for evidence to confirm my sense of
foreboding but when I arrive at Sheryl’s suite at the Ritz-Carlton the

morning of the meeting, I see a stunningly beautiful Japanese woman,
perfectly made up and stylishly dressed, quietly crying outside it.
“Are you okay?” I ask tentatively.
She nods. The tears streaming down her cheeks somehow make her
even more impossibly lovely.
At that moment Debbie comes bundling out of Sheryl’s suite and pulls
me close.
“I wouldn’t go in there.”
“Why?”
“You were going to go in there, weren’t you?”
“Um, yeah—what’s happening?”
“Major issue with the makeup and hair.”
“Is that who’s crying outside the door? The makeup artist?”
“Ah, yeah. The makeup was a disaster and let’s not mention the hair. I
mean, I think it was basically fine, but Sheryl hated it and some of her
instructions were lost in translation and it’s all come to a head.”
“Or on her head?” I try to pun. Debbie ignores it.
“Oh god. Is it a cultural thing?” I ask. “Like was the makeup artist
doing what she thinks Western women want? Quite eighties? It’s still really
early. Can you get someone else?”
“Ah, that was the someone else. She already fired the first makeup
artist.”
“Ouch. She made her cry too? Okay, so I’m guessing a third makeup
artist isn’t going to happen.”
“No, I think she’s going to do it herself, but this does not bode well for
the day ahead.”
This is a side of Sheryl I have not seen before. Debbie lets me know I’d
better get used to it.
I take her warning and go back to my room to continue prepping for the
meeting with Prime Minister Abe. Sheryl’s approach is very different from
Mark’s. He wants briefings no longer than a text he can read on the screen
of his phone without scrolling. Sheryl wants as much detail as possible.
More than anything, what she really wants is a photo of Prime Minister
Abe holding her book. And that’s the one thing that the Japanese prime

minister’s office has very politely but firmly insisted could not be done.
Sheryl decides she’ll simply hijack the prime minister with a presentation of
the book at the end of the meeting. I’m carrying the book. I’ve added an
inscription to the prime minister and his wife. It feels like smuggling illicit
contraband. I hate myself for being part of this.
Arriving at the prime minister’s sleek office, I’m surprised by the
crowds of photographers and self-conscious about my pregnant body. I’m
not enjoying my role as the designated Lean In visual aid. Sheryl and the
prime minister mug for the cameras, doing the Facebook thumbs-up sign.
Then the press is dismissed and they sit and talk. It’s the two of them, each
with a couple of advisers and interpreters, whom we don’t use. Abe does the
whole meeting in perfect English.
It goes better than I ever imagined. Sheryl hits every single talking
point. There’s actual policy discussion about data centers, consumer
protection and privacy. The Lean In connection to womenomics works—
he’s interested, and it doesn’t seem out of place. It’s proper diplomacy. His
team used everything we gave them and Abe came prepared to respond to
all the issues we’d raised. Sheryl pitches changing Japanese law to allow
politicians to use Facebook for elections. We tell him about the disaster
response tool we’re developing in the wake of the tsunami, which interests
him. By the time they’re done talking, it feels like we have a real
relationship with him and his key advisers. It’s our first successful meeting
with a head of state. The whole thing is like a symphony I orchestrated.
Sheryl and the prime minister stand up. This is the moment I’ve been
dreading. I have my hand firmly on the gift copy of Lean In and thrust it
toward the prime minister like it’s a bomb about to detonate. I then leap out
in front of the two of them with my phone, quickly snapping off three
photos before his team can stop me. Or maybe they’re just reluctant to
wrestle away a pregnant lady.
We return to our van outside his office, ignoring the questions the media
are shouting, and Sheryl asks me to sit beside her. Unexpectedly, she wraps
herself around me and gives me a deep, long hug.
“That was amazing, Sarah. I don’t know how you pulled it off, but it
was phenomenal.”

I’m trying not to blush. “It was a team effort. Really, everyone here in
this van, it couldn’t have happened without them.”
Her tone changes. “Learn how to take a compliment,” she snaps. “This
was all you and it was wonderful.” I feel like I’m being told off.
After a day of media events and Sheryl’s Lean In town hall, Debbie and
the others urge me to come with them for a drink, but I’m tired and
pregnant and opt to go back in the van in a group that includes Sheryl and
her parents. I sit in the back seat trying to be as inconspicuous as possible,
letting the warm glow of the day wash over me. The others are talking
through the events of the day.
I’m not really listening until I hear Sheryl’s voice change sharply at the
mention of her children having had lunch at McDonald’s. She’s furious that
her children have eaten at the fast food restaurant; she would never let them
eat “that sort of food.”
We all stare out of the van at the lights of Tokyo flashing past. It is
gently suggested that this was a thoughtful decision. Informed not just by
the children wanting some comfort in an unfamiliar place with unfamiliar
food, but by a photo she posted on Facebook. Taken at McDonald’s
corporate headquarters, Sheryl beaming as she’s eating Chicken McNuggets
and burgers. She barks back that “of course she wasn’t really eating.” That
was just a photo. She doesn’t eat McDonald’s and neither should her
children. What if they were seen eating that crap?
Everyone in the car slips into painful silence. I’m scared that Sheryl will
remember I’m there in the back seat. I focus on folding my pregnant self
into the smallest space possible, barely daring to breathe.
My mind involuntarily keeps repeating the John Updike quote
“Celebrity is a mask that eats into the face.” The glow from the day’s
success is now completely gone and I just feel sad. Sad because every
person there is trying to do the right thing. Sad because Sheryl can’t see the
good intentions of everyone in that van. Sad because it’s so understandable
to take a photo at face value. To believe it is real. How was anyone
supposed to know those publicity photos were just the mask Sheryl chose?
And, finally, I feel a deep sadness for Sheryl, who let the mask eat into her
face.

We all fly out the next morning—them on United to San Francisco, me
on Asiana to New York—and spirits are low. As soon as I land in the US
and switch on my phone, a bunch of messages pop up, checking to make
sure I’m okay. Weird. Googling, I learn that an Asiana plane, one that
departed a little earlier than mine, had crash-landed at San Francisco
International Airport, killing three people and injuring over two hundred. I
flip through the news and see reports that Sheryl, Debbie, and others on our
team were supposed to be on that flight. They apparently got this from
Sheryl, who (for a change) posted on Facebook that she and our colleagues
“were originally going to take the Asiana flight that just crash-landed. We
switched to United so we could use miles for my family’s tickets.” This of
course unleashes a storm of concerned comments.
Immediately I stop scrolling and call Debbie.
“Are you okay?”
“Yeah, I’m tired and my neck…”
“No,” I cut in. “I saw you guys were supposed to be on the Asiana
flight. Did something change?”
“You mean Sheryl’s Facebook post about being booked on that flight?
It’s totally weird.”
“You weren’t on that flight. I mean you guys were giving me shit for
flying Asiana, calling it a budget airline.”
“I know, it’s so strange. Sheryl always flies United. That’s who she has
status with. We never considered Asiana. I don’t know why she posted it. I
don’t know why she tagged all of us. Now I’ve got to deal with incoming
media queries about it, though apparently she’s just emailing reporters
herself.”
“I don’t get it,” I said. “I know I’m jet lagged but this doesn’t make any
sense.”
“I know. It’s fucked up. You should get some rest.”
I hang up, but I’m unnerved and the feeling of disquiet never really
leaves. A friend who has seen the reports and knows I’m traveling with
Sheryl messages to check that everything’s okay. Initially I repeat what is in
the press, thinking that’s what I’m supposed to do, before calling her back

to tell her the truth. People don’t lie about narrowly missing plane crashes,
do they? Why would she? It’s not like she needs attention.
I never see Sheryl the same way after that.

10
Only Good News
It’s not like I didn’t know about Sheryl’s temper before the Japan trip. I’d
seen her blow up many times, at lots of people, berating them, humiliating
them, including Marne, one of her best friends. But after Japan, what hits
me, over and over, is how arbitrary it is. I never can predict what will
trigger an outburst, which makes it especially unnerving.
One memorable example, nine of us are in Sheryl’s conference room.
The name she’s given this room is as ominous as you could get, given her
anger-management issues: Only Good News. We’re waiting for a meeting
to begin. The start time comes and goes and we all sit there, eight of us,
looking at her expectantly.
“Where’s Debbie?” she demands. I’m confused. Debbie’s been involved
in the issue we’re discussing to provide comms advice, but she’s not leading
the meeting. Someone reassures Sheryl that she’ll be here soon but we can
get things started.
“Call her,” Sheryl commands.
Someone punches Debbie’s number into the Polycom in the middle of
the table and gently asks her where she is.
“I’m nearly there,” she assures the gathered group. “Start without me.
I’ll be with you shortly.”
“Where are you?” Sheryl demands.
“I’m just turning into campus,” Debbie assures her. “At the traffic
lights.”

We all look at Sheryl, ready for her to start the meeting. But she just sits
there and waits. And so do we. It’s just awkward silence. Minutes pass.
Eventually we’re past any reasonable amount of time it could take to get
from the traffic lights to Sheryl’s conference room.
It probably wasn’t much more than ten minutes.
Finally Debbie enters the room in a bluster of apologies. Sheryl looks at
her accusingly and says, “You weren’t at the traffic lights.”
“Sorry, traffic was a nightmare. I’d just come off the highway…”
Sheryl cuts her off and, in front of her colleagues, gives her a dressing
down about blaming the traffic rather than accepting responsibility for not
anticipating traffic. She asks how many times she’s driven this particular
road, why she hadn’t considered the needs of her coworkers in deciding
when to leave her house, what time might have been more appropriate to set
off from San Francisco to reach Menlo Park. She vents that Debbie has
wasted her coworkers’ time (making no mention of her own decision to
waste our time with this performance).
By now I know there’s probably no specific reason for this outburst.
Debbie’s not in the habit of being late. I’d be shocked if she had been
underperforming in the days or weeks before this. It’s just Sheryl, in an
arbitrary flex of power. That seems to be how she operates, unpredictable,
keeping us all on edge. Never quite knowing when she’ll strike, so we’re
never tempted to push any boundaries, even the simplest ones. Strict rules,
selectively enforced and the baseline of ever-present fear. It ensures we
obey in advance. Why does someone need to be so mean to the people
helping her? I’ve been at Facebook for a few years now, and I’ve hit a point
like the phase of a romance where you still see everything great that
attracted you to the person in the first place. You’re still excited by the
future you’re building together. But you’ve spent enough time together that
you also see their flaws. And wonder how deep they run. I don’t know if
Sheryl’s outbursts are an occasional thing—which I can cope with—or if
that’s who she is. And I’m nervous it’s the latter.
I feel this way about the job in general. I’m the person Facebook flies in
to deal with governments around the world. It still feels exciting and
important to spread this tool around the world to improve people’s lives.

But at the same time, there’s the disturbing things we’re starting to hear
about bad experiences users have on the platform, like kids being bullied,
privacy violations, harassment and crime triggered by Facebook posts. And
there are moments like this.
I’m worried that I’m getting used to these things.
We all sit there and witness Debbie’s humiliation. This is someone who
normally owns the room. Sassy. Now flustered and small and apologizing
over and over: “I’m so sorry,” “You’re right,” “I should’ve left earlier,” “So
sorry, Sheryl.”
I feel terrible for her, but none of us leap to her defense. There’d be no
point.
Or there is the time at the World Economic Forum in Davos,
Switzerland, in 2013, when there’s a badge missing for one of Sheryl’s
assistants. The guilty party is back home in Silicon Valley, so Sheryl lets
loose on the people who happen to be standing in front of her, me and her
best friend, Marne.
We’re standing in the registration tent. Lots of people are milling around
and witness her tirade. “Why did no one think about this? Do I have to do
all these things myself? Why do I have a team that doesn’t think through the
most basic requirements? What is the point of having you…” I start to
respond that our jobs are in policy, neither of us is responsible for the
badges, but Marne stops me. “Take it,” she says to me quietly. “Just take
responsibility.” So I do, kowtowing to Sheryl as Marne grovels alongside
me. Then she and I march into a WEF workroom and literally stand over a
staffer, refusing to leave until they print a badge.
Other times, of course, Sheryl is charming, charismatic, whip-smart. She’s
all these things at once. There’s talk of her running for office, or taking a
job in the Obama administration. There’s an influx of people to Facebook
who want to work for her. They’re drawn to her like moths to a flame.
There’s a growing class of people looking to align themselves with a
billionaire on the up, but people are drawn to Sheryl in particular. It’s a

running joke in the DC office, where we know they’ve only seen one side
of her: “Incoming moth number twenty-seven. Prepare for impact.”
Sometimes, of course, you can predict that something will upset Sheryl.
When I learn that Angela Merkel—the German chancellor—has declined
Sheryl’s request for a meeting, Marne tells me not to tell her. “We never can
let her know,” she says. “Just say it’s a scheduling issue.” We both know
how angry Sheryl would be if she found out that Merkel doesn’t think
Sheryl’s important enough to talk to.
So that’s what I do. I lie to Sheryl. This doesn’t feel right. Weeks later,
Marne cracks and tells her. I don’t know why. Exactly as she predicted,
Sheryl’s hurt and furious. Not at us for lying (although she probably should
be worried about that). She’s mad at Merkel and at us for not overcoming
any reservations Merkel had about meeting. For months after that, anytime
her name comes up, Sheryl bitterly reminds everyone how Merkel wouldn’t
meet with her. It gets to a point where we all try to avoid mentioning
Germany at all.
In January 2014, I’m in a meeting with an all-male lineup of Facebook
law enforcement experts when my water breaks. I Uber to the hospital and
things get underway pretty fast. I get a message. Sheryl’s about to
unexpectedly go into a meeting with the president of Brazil at Davos and
she wants talking points. I’m in the delivery room, my feet in stirrups, in
labor. I put down my phone and reach for my laptop. I start drafting.
“What are you doing?” Tom asks.
“Just getting Sheryl some talking points.”
“Sarah, no.”
I continue typing. He appeals to my doctor, a person he knows I deeply
respect: “Dr. Veca, make this stop.”
“Two more minutes,” I say, between contractions. Trying not to think of
Lean In’s direction: don’t leave before you leave.
Dr. Veca reaches over and gently closes my laptop. She says, “It’s a very
special thing to give birth to your first child. I don’t think you should be
working through it. Sheryl will understand.”
“She won’t,” I say. “Please let me push Send.”
“You should be pushing,” she says. “But not send.”

Despite the disapproval in the room, I quickly reopen the laptop. I send
the email. I know how this looks, and I can’t defend it. Looking back, I still
can’t quite believe it. I’m ashamed. And I can’t blame this entirely on
Facebook. I’ve been this kind of driven person my whole life. I don’t like to
let people down. But it’s also true that at Facebook, I didn’t feel like I had a
choice.
Not long after, our daughter Sasha is born.
Compared with New Zealand, where there’s six months’ paid leave and
many people take a year, maternity leave is short in the US, and I feel
pressure to return to work even before I use it up. I’m not really sure how to
combine this job with motherhood. Especially since this job never stops.
When I have to travel to work in the Silicon Valley office, I take the baby
and pay coworkers’ nannies to watch her. For the part of my job that falls
outside traditional work hours, Sasha comes with me. To a rally in Madison
Square Garden for India’s newly elected prime minister Narendra Modi. To
Canada, where Facebook has been ordered to testify in Parliament, and
where I’m detained at the border, until a phone call to Tom satisfies border
officials that I am not absconding to Ottawa after kidnapping a tiny baby.
I thought I was doing a good job in a difficult situation. But my first
performance review after maternity leave is problematic. While it’s
positive, the only negative feedback relates to my baby. The fact that people
can hear her in the background on calls—mostly because West Coast time
means I’m often taking the calls on the East Coast in the evening, at home,
where my baby lives. Travel is more complicated. I’d relocated to New
York, and that meant I now had to travel to Washington, DC, regularly.
Where I’m from it’s more usual for a baby to be with its mother or family
for the first six months of life if not longer. My family is trying to come up
with creative ways to make that happen with my mother, grandmother, and
sister all traveling to New York to help.
A few weeks after the review, Marne and I are at Facebook’s
headquarters when Sheryl pulls me aside.

“Marne told me about your childcare situation,” she says breezily. I’m
mortified this is something that has been discussed with the COO. But I
understand this is her way of caring. She’s trying to be nice. She’s saying
this because she likes me.
“Hire a nanny,” she instructs. “Be smart and hire a Filipina nanny.”
She mistakes my look of horror for skepticism.
“Sarah, I’m telling you, they’re English speaking, sunny disposition,
and service orientated.” Marne echoes this sentiment. Both have at least
one Filipina nanny in their retinue of staff.
I call Tom and tell him about these conversations, telling him the COO
of Facebook is now involved in our childcare.
“This is appalling,” he says. “How can employers say such things?”
“I guess this is the real Lean In. The stuff Sheryl really believes about
work and womanhood but doesn’t put in the book.”
I don’t want it to be an issue for my performance reviews in the future,
so Tom and I follow their instructions.
The day our new Filipina nanny starts, I’m in Mexico with Mark,
meeting with the Mexican president. He was completely against this
meeting, and I don’t feel like I can opt out, after browbeating him into it as
part of my push to have Mark engage at the presidential level to understand
how Facebook is impacting other countries. It’s my first time leaving Sasha
and I cry the whole way to the airport.
Tom is a vigilant father in ordinary times. The first day the baby’s alone
with the nanny he’s extreme. Obsessively checking the baby monitor, which
streams video. He’s set it up on his mobile and the desktop at his office.
During one of these checks, he sees the baby alone in her playpen, the
nanny conspicuously absent. At first, he’s curious. But the longer he
watches, with no nanny in sight, the more alarmed he becomes. He tries to
call our new nanny. She doesn’t pick up. Panicked, he continues to
obsessively check the monitor and call the nanny and then everyone we
know in the neighborhood. Nobody’s home. Eventually in the background
he sees a firefighter in full fire gear walking through our small apartment.
He immediately abandons his desk and calls 911 demanding to know why

emergency services are in our home. They can’t help. He calls me in
Mexico City.
“The baby,” he says as soon as I pick up. “The baby is alone and there’s
a firefighter in our apartment.”
Panic doesn’t begin to capture the terror I feel as he relays what’s
happening.
I’m in a car with Elliot and Javi, speeding from the Mexican president’s
house to a Carlos Slim event. As Tom speeds through the streets of
Manhattan as fast as the taxi agrees to drive him, I don’t think I’ve ever
heard him more scared.
Ultimately, Sasha’s fine. Our small New York third-floor walk-up has
some cupboards outside the front door. Our nanny went to get something
from the cupboard and found herself locked out, with her phone inside the
apartment. Eventually, she used a stranger’s phone to call emergency
services, who broke in through the roof. With everyone safe and accounted
for, we eventually forget about it, until my next performance review when
Marne raises it:
“You shouldn’t tell stories like that, about your baby and nanny.”
My heart sinks. She wasn’t even in Mexico.
“It wasn’t a story. My baby was trapped by herself and the fire
department was called. We didn’t know if something terrible had
happened.”
“That’s not the point. These are personal issues. I’m trying to help. To
give you honest feedback. When you’re with the most senior members on
the team, Mark, Elliot, Javi, you need to be professional and focused on
them.”
Seriously? My baby’s alone in an apartment with emergency services
breaking in through the roof and I’m not supposed to mention it because it’s
personal? And they all discussed this situation afterward and found me
lacking?
The expectation at Facebook is that mothering is invisible, and the more
skilled you are, the more invisible it is. Months later when the baby’s
rushed to the hospital in an ambulance, I don’t mention it at the office for

days. Then I only mention it in passing, assuring Marne that it won’t affect
my work in any way.
This “don’t mention the children” ethos is of course the opposite of the
cheery slogans at Facebook to “bring your authentic self to work.” All
Sheryl’s Lean In stories about leaving work at 5:30 P.M. and telling her
coworkers she needed to be home with her children. Because the reality is
that there is a big difference between what people at Facebook say and what
they do, especially in relation to children. For example, Facebook had
planned to launch a Facebook for children codenamed “Project Family,”
and Sheryl would occasionally remind the policy team of their “failure to
do this while we had the opportunity,” blaming the policy team for missing
the chance to get kids on Facebook but she, like most of the leaders at
Facebook with younger children, severely limits her kids’ access to screens,
let alone social media accounts. And she never shares images of her
children on social media. Silicon Valley is awash in wooden Montessori
toys and shrouded in total screen bans. Parents at work talk about how they
don’t allow their teens to have mobile phones, which only underscores how
well these executives understand the real damage their product inflicts on
young minds.
This year, like every year, Sheryl hosts Women’s Day, an offsite
conference for all the women who work for Facebook. At that point, it’s
hundreds of women, whom she flies in to stay at a hotel in San Francisco.
We’re asked to share hotel rooms, an odd professional situation for grown
women, forcing us to navigate sleeping, sharing bathrooms, and wearing
pajamas with our colleagues.
Women’s Day is part evangelical church event, part multilevel
marketing summit, part Tony Robbins seminar, part yoga retreat, part
Oprah episode. Sheryl presides, dressed in Lululemon yoga pants and Ugg
boots. There’s a lot of talk about motherhood. Sheryl’s favored lieutenants,
in shiny uniformity, provide relatable stories of how they balance parenting
and demanding careers. The head of HR mock-confides in a scandalously
humorous tone that she sometimes gives her children cereal for dinner.
Sheryl tells a story from Lean In about bringing her four-year-old daughter
on a friend’s corporate jet, the eBay Gulfstream, where her daughter

announces, “Mommy, my head itches!” Sheryl checks. Her daughter has
lice. “I was the only person bringing young children on this corporate
plane,” she says. “I spent the rest of the flight in a complete panic, trying to
keep her isolated, her voice down.” This is offered as a story any mom can
connect to. As if we all have friends with Gulfstreams. There are videos of
women from Sheryl’s inner circle—all white, beautifully lit and shot—
working out in their palatial home gyms, playing with their photogenic
children, and relaxing with their mutely supportive husbands. All of these
mothering fables are careful to edit out the role played by the phalanx of
nannies and other help who usually do the bulk of the actual labor of raising
children.
Mothering in form, not function.
They don’t discuss the real secret behind maintaining their work-life
balance, mothering as if they don’t have children: it’s undergirded by their
multimillion-dollar paychecks.
There’s usually some trauma porn, heroic tales of less high-profile
employees working through cancer or some other tragedy, but with a video
montage they always triumph and return to Facebook working harder and
better than they did before. The point, I suppose, is to measure your life
against theirs, and inspire you to work harder.
Sheryl pushes the same kinds of messages in weekly updates she sends
to senior executives called HPM (Highlights, People, Me). Stories like the
time Sheryl and her family went on holiday with Marne and her family in
Europe:
Due to work issues and the time change, I wound up missing
most/all breakfasts and dinners as I was on the phone.… During one
of the last dinners, my kids came to find me—I was sitting in a
staircase outside the restaurant on the phone. They looked upset and
started to tell me that they thought I should be at the dinner but I had
to tell them that I had to finish the call and then talk. When I was off
I came to find them, expecting them to be upset. Instead, they gave
me a big hug and said, “we just want to thank you for working so
hard to help billions of people!” I looked at Marne, who was on

vacation with us and another family, and asked what happened.
Marne had seen them upset and explained that she knew I did not
want to miss meals and I was upset too but I had a job I needed to
do and they should be proud of me.… It was a brilliant reframe that
I know I will try again when I need it. And might help some of you
when you need it for professional or personal reasons one day too.
Sheryl’s messages weren’t subtle.

11
Road Trip
Lots of moms have issues combining breastfeeding and working. My issue
is the expectation from my bosses that breasts can be turned on and off like
a faucet and I can breastfeed anywhere, anytime. And I really mean
anywhere.
In summer 2014, Colombia’s minister of information technology and
communication invites Javi to Colombia 3.0, a tech conference in Bogotá. I
think Javi can handle this one on his own, and I have a five-month-old at
home. My bosses think differently. I’m ordered to go. I reconcile myself to
this. It’s three days. I can’t bring the baby but I can bring a breast pump. I
can handle it.
We’re in Colombia because of something called Internet.org. Mark
launched it nearly a year ago, in August 2013, with a paper grandly titled
“Is Connectivity a Human Right?” In his opening paragraph, he lays out
what he calls “one of the greatest challenges of our generation”:
Today we connect more than 1.15 billion people each month. But as
we started thinking about connecting the next 5 billion, we realized
something important: the vast majority of people in the world don’t
have access to the internet.
Mark then presents his vision for how to give free internet to all those
people. He explains that we could radically reduce the cost of building the
infrastructure and delivering data, if we start them off with very basic
service. The key is that it would be all text. No movies, no high-resolution

photos, no music—those all use too much data. He says the priority should
be tools to get people the information they need. For Mark that means
search, some version of Wikipedia, weather, messaging, and—of course—
social media. Websites would be modified into text-only versions. Already,
Facebook has an app like this called Facebook Zero, with lots of users
across Africa and Asia.
Who’ll bear the cost of all these free services? The mobile operators—
telecom companies around the world. They’re the ones who’ll invest. Mark
argues that this scheme makes smart business sense for them because it
delivers hundreds of millions of new customers who eventually will want to
upgrade and buy data plans for their phones. One of his big talking points is
that once people get a taste of what’s on the internet, they’ll want to pay for
more data and more access. In Africa, Facebook users are already making
the switch to broadband, so they can get pictures and everything else you
don’t get on the text-only product. The “org” in “Internet.org” is a way of
suggesting there is an altruistic mission at the heart of this.
So that’s the vision.
A few months later, Mark announces partnerships that Facebook’s
Connectivity Lab has established, “to build drones, satellites and lasers to
deliver the internet” to the billions of people who don’t have it.
I’ll admit, I and the rest of the policy team don’t pay much attention to
all this. Internet.org is in such a nascent stage, and just one of the projects
Facebook has going at the time. Facebook buys both WhatsApp and the
virtual reality company Oculus within a month of Mark’s announcement to
build a fleet of low-flying internet drones. But from the little I know it
sounds like a good thing.
Then, in May 2014, Chile’s telecommunications regulator makes it
illegal to give away the kinds of free services Internet.org plans to offer,
effectively banning the venture before it’s even launched. I hear about this
from Javi, who’s alarmed. “Chile is small but if this starts spreading to other
countries,” he says, “we will have a problem.” We decide we need a quick
win, some Latin American government saying yes to Internet.org. To help
convince them, I suggest to Javi that we add free e-government services to

the Internet.org apps, things like paying your taxes or signing up for social
services. That will give each government skin in the game.
And we’re here in Colombia to try to convince its president Juan
Manuel Santos to be our partner. I need some big name to stand on a stage
with us to tell the world—especially other presidents and prime ministers—
they love Internet.org and make the Chileans reconsider their decision.
The way I get President Santos is first to court his minister of
information technology and communication. Javi signs us up to see
firsthand the challenges of connectivity in the jungle. The minister
describes it to Javi as getting to know the “real Colombia” through a road
trip. We fly to Bucaramanga in the north. When we land, we’re led to a line
of armored vehicles occupied by lots of military men with large guns and
dark green uniforms. Turns out, the area is a stronghold for the militia of the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), revolutionary guerrillas
who are still fighting and kidnapping foreigners, despite ongoing peace
negotiations.
My sense of alarm rises when it’s explained that the minister will not be
riding in the big black ministerial jeep, or the decoy big black ministerial
jeep, which we’re told to ride in, but instead in one of the many security
vehicles accompanying them, perched among a group of soldiers with
automatic weapons. I ask Javi if it’s such a good idea to get in a car that’s
too dangerous for the government official to ride in. He’s like, let’s just roll
with it. We get in.
We drive for hours into the jungle, off-road. I mean, there are no roads.
And obviously no electricity. No privacy. It’s hard to imagine a worse place
to try to use a bulky electric breast pump that needs to be plugged into a
wall. Four or five hours into this, I’m in physical pain. But I don’t dwell on
that because I’m so afraid we’ll be attacked. We seem like a ridiculously
conspicuous target, churning our way through the wilderness. I think, if
we’re kidnapped, pumping will be out of the question. And ultimately it is
for this trip. Despite the excruciating pain, I don’t pump until I’m safely
back in Bogotá that night.
But this wasn’t even my worst experience. Two months later, September
2014, I go to Turkey. After my experience in Colombia, I’m nervous about

pumping. I’m right to be. The pump needs to be plugged in, and once our
Turkish Airlines flight hits cruising altitude, I discover that neither the
bathroom nor the seat has any outlets. Over the next ten hours my anxiety
rises as my breasts swell and harden with milk. I’m in a black cardigan and
white T-shirt, and by the time I make it through customs and immigration
the white T-shirt is soaked and I’m in agony. Predictably the cab line is long
and the traffic in central Istanbul is terrible. By the time we make it to the
hotel I am beyond desperate to pump. There’s a massive line to check in
and I find myself tapping my foot and squeezing my palms, ready to burst.
As soon as I’m safely in my room I simply drop the suitcase, grab the
pump as fast as I can, and plug it in—not even bothering to remove my T-
shirt, which is now a translucent rag. I just use the V-neck. I attach the
arcane pieces of equipment and flip the switch to start the pump. It turns
over.
Click.… Click.… Click.
I check that the room key is in the slot for electricity just in case that’s
the issue, but no. Nothing. I navigate my way back to reception, where
there’s still a long line. When I get to the front and try to explain the
problem, the woman at the desk looks confused and apologizes, saying that
her English isn’t very good. I switch to hand gestures, lots of circular
motions and squeezing my hands. I’m so close to tears of frustration and
pain, and at a certain point I just gesture at my breasts and sopping T-shirt
and make a squeezing motion. She finally smiles knowingly, gives me a
wink, and assures me she’ll have it sorted in no time. I head back to my
room.
As soon as I hear the knock at my door I race to open it. There’s a man in
overalls, dark shaggy hair, stubble, gray eyes. I give him the most
welcoming smile and hurry him into my room, closing the door. I bring him
over to the pump by the bed and explain the clicking noise. It becomes clear
that he does not speak English at all. But what’s weird is that he seems
uninterested in the pump. I’ve perched beside him on the bed trying to

explain the issue, and at a certain point I realize he’s gently guiding me into
the bed.
I shake my head no. And point back at the pump.
He looks confused, gestures at my wet T-shirt and my breasts popping
out of the V-neck, and lifts his hands. He does the same air-pumping
motions I’d performed in the lobby earlier.
I suddenly realize the kind of pumping he has in mind. And it’s not
going to help me.
I point to my wedding ring and shake my head no.
He musters some English: “No problem. No problem. It’s no problem
for me.”
“Yes—but it’s a problem for me. There’s been some kind of
misunderstanding. This is not what I need.”
I walk to the other side of the room. Open the door. And walk out.
At a nearby pharmacy, I buy what I surmise is a hand pump. Finally,
relief. Roughly half a day after I first needed it.

12
The Body
We’re about to travel to the one country in the world where there’s an open
arrest warrant for Mark Zuckerberg. And Mark thinks this is the time to
show us his fake gangsta handshakes.
Debbie and I are trying to teach him the respectful bow one’s supposed
to do when meeting the leader of South Korea. Sheryl of course diligently
absorbed all our advice on bows, greetings, gifts, and other protocol issues
that arise when meeting with a head of state, but Mark treats it like a weird
goofing-off session. Debbie and I demonstrate where to put your hands
when you bow to a president, how to arrange your face, how deep the bow
goes. He crosses his arms like the Kangol-hat-era LL Cool J and rocks his
body from side to side hip-hop-style, before moving to a series of fist
bumps, high fives, and backward low fives.
Let’s not even get into how odd the moves look, coming from this slim,
pale-to-the-point-of-translucent man with a square haircut and very rigid
posture. It’s troubling because this matters. When Bill Gates greeted the
South Korean president with one hand in his pocket, it was considered so
disrespectful it made headlines as “the handshake that bruised a nation.” It
undermined anything else that came out of those meetings, and my Korean
friends still talk about it. Mark doesn’t care.
Of course, this is the same man who’s shown absolutely no interest in
policy issues or countries outside the US since I arrived at Facebook. Or
almost no interest. The first time Mark traveled to a country to meet with a
foreign head of state since I arrived was in 2012 when he flew to Russia. He

met Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev, and then in 2013 he had a
perfunctory meeting with the Korean president, both of which Marne
handled. Mark was nervous and sweaty in both.
The few policy meetings that Mark agrees to do after that harden his
belief that meeting with foreign leaders is not a good use of his time.
Midway through this protocol session, I realize I’m one of the few people
who work with him on something he’s scared of. His discomfort and fear
are visible and can be measured in sweat.
This trip—in October 2014—is the first time I’m going to be working
so closely with Mark. Up until now most of our interaction has been over
email, or filtered through Sheryl, Elliot, or Marne. It’s been functional
exchanges, the occasional meeting, not weeks together on the road. Four
years after I had pitched Mark on engaging with heads of state, we’re now
trying to secure meetings with a bunch of them in one trip, including those
of Indonesia, Japan, and Korea.
This does not go down well with Sheryl. Meeting with world leaders is
her terrain. She instructs Elliot that Mark should not be doing “other stuff”
beyond business meetings outside the US. Elliot rolls his eyes at this. Of
course the company’s CEO should be meeting with presidents and prime
ministers. He tells me he’ll take care of it and he does.
Mark is bringing the Mteam—the top managers of the company (M for
“management”)—on this trip. It’s the first time they’re traveling together
outside the US. The full-court press is because the company’s growth is
increasingly in Asia. This trip will open up a new front in Facebook’s
slowly expanding war with Google. Despite the fact that, or maybe because,
so many of our top managers worked at Google, there’s a profound mistrust
of the search giant and a discomfort about the way Facebook relies on
Google for the company’s future success.
Right now, most of our users access Facebook on their Android phones
or iPhones. Android’s made by Google, so this gives Google and Apple
very meaningful control over Facebook. Either could potentially remove
Facebook from their app stores and devices, or restrict the way things like
notifications work with Facebook. Google—very aware of its power over
Facebook—is increasing pressure in a variety of ways, like requesting

payment or data in return for Facebook’s use of Google Maps. (Years later,
when Apple allows iPhone users to opt out of the tracking Facebook does
for advertisers, Facebook’s market value drops $10 billion.)
At one point, Facebook tried to take more control of its destiny by
creating its own phone (“Project Buffy”—named semi-ironically for Buffy
the Vampire Slayer and “social layer”). It launches in 2013, a collaboration
with a Chinese company called HTC, and is a massive flop. Time magazine
calls it one of the biggest tech failures of the year.
In fact, the trip to Korea is framed to Mteam as a trip to Samsung. The
goal for the trip is to deepen trust and build goodwill with a company that
isn’t Apple or Google. Maybe Samsung will agree to preload Facebook on
all Samsung phones.
Unfortunately, Korea is the one country that has an open criminal
investigation into Facebook executives. There are arrest warrants for Mark
and Sheryl and other Mteam members.
The reason for this is unclear, but it appears that the body that oversees
gaming in Korea wrote to us warning that Korean law required Facebook to
submit the games on our platform to be rated by the government. It’s not
clear exactly what happened after the letter was received, but the Koreans
say that Facebook ignored it. It’s shocking that there was no reply. But it’s
plausible. The company is still very “move fast and break things” and “ask
for forgiveness, not permission.”
Now the situation has escalated. The Cybercrime Branch of the Seoul
Police has gotten involved. And you don’t mess around with Korean police.
When they started investigating Google, Google’s head of Korea had to flee
the country.
Still, Facebook appears to stonewall, claiming that basically no one in
Korea—not the Korean government, not the Korean police—has any power
over them. This seems to be Facebook’s preferred position with all
countries outside the US and Ireland (where it has its international
headquarters). The company disputes their power to regulate Facebook at
all, unless they’ve enacted specific laws targeting our business and
legislating jurisdiction. So, I believe, if a local government notices false
advertising on Facebook and asks us to take it down, unless they have a law

giving them power or prohibiting misleading ads that specifically applies to
social media companies, Facebook won’t act. Facebook’s American
leadership believes the “values” it defines can trump national laws when
they conflict.
That’s what seems so outrageous to me about how Korea is being
handled. The government there does have a law demanding that we get our
games rated and approved, and it seems we’re refusing to even
acknowledge it.
It’s a hard argument to make, rejecting the authority of a government or
police agency in a country where you operate.
And Korea isn’t alone in cracking down on Facebook. Other countries
have opened investigations for all sorts of reasons. Our international offices
have had “visits” and “raids”—armed and unarmed—in Brazil, Korea,
India, and France. I usually hear about these when a phone call or email
arrives from our local head of office. (“Hiii! There’s a man with a gun here
wanting to know when we’ll be paying taxes in Brazil.”)
By now it happens with enough regularity that we’ve set up emergency
procedures for raids. They include shutting down access to Facebook’s
network. Because of course the real difference between a “virtual state” like
Facebook and a “real state” like Brazil or Korea is they have real police
with real arms.
In India the situation’s so bad, Facebook’s leadership hires an ex–police
captain who’s been given some boring, official-sounding title but is
understood by the policy team to be someone who “would be able to handle
an arrest situation well”—that is, go to jail in a clash between Facebook and
the Indian government.
In August, just a few weeks before our trip, a Korea crisis meeting is
called. Elliot is part of Mteam and going on the trip, so he is suddenly very
focused on the potential for him, Mark, and Sheryl to end up in a jail cell.
Our lawyers have sent an email that includes the line, “The threat of jail and
criminal liability is very real.”
I set out various solutions, based on the possibility that Facebook is
guilty as charged. Like, we could cooperate with Korea’s Cybercrime

Police. Or we could shift Facebook’s whole approach and review how we
obey the laws of the countries in which we’re operating.
“Would this apply everywhere?” Marne asks.
“Yes, we can’t just make a change for Korea, or other countries will see
why that happened and issue arrest warrants for Mark,” I say to a
dissatisfied room. “I think it’s a change we need to make everywhere
anyway.”
This gets no traction. So I decide not to speak any further, ceding the
floor to those more senior than me.
“We need a body to arrest.”
“To call their bluff.”
“See how serious they are.”
It’s breathtaking to me, how casually leadership speaks of employees
being jailed. As if it’s a fact of life like taxes (though of course that’s
something they try to avoid). Everyone starts calling this a “mitigation
strategy”—even though the mitigation in this case is to find a “body” to be
arrested.
I lose track of the conversation and get lost in thought about how their
language removes the moral questions. “A body to arrest” is more like
chattel you own, rather than somebody’s son or daughter. Such an odd
phrase to hear in corporate America.
This is what we’re talking about. Rather than whether our actions in
Korea are right or not.
“We need to get someone to test the appetite of the Korean authorities
for arresting someone from headquarters. It can’t be someone located there.
They need to fly in before Mark and Sheryl do. You know, a body,” Elliot
states matter-of-factly.
The room falls silent. It’s a weird thing to realize that the tech world,
this most modern of industries, has cannon fodder.
“I can’t go,” one of the senior security guys in the room quickly says,
followed quickly by others. But they didn’t need to. Everyone in this room
is too senior to be “the body.”
Eventually, the silence becomes awkward. I slowly realize everyone is
looking at me. The least senior person in the room.

“Me?” I ask, as if there’s been a terrible case of mistaken identity.
Elliot nods.
I’m the body.

13
Stockholm Syndrome
I don’t think this says anything good about me, but I would’ve gone and
gotten arrested. Somehow, it didn’t seem like I had a say in the matter. This
was my job. I started to prepare. It took Tom to point out, no, you have a
seven-month-old baby at home. Doing jail time in a foreign country is not a
reasonable ask from your bosses.
It honestly had not occurred to me that I could say no. I have this thing,
which sometimes I think is related to being an eldest daughter, that
someone has to take responsibility and do the hard thing and I guess that’s
going to be me. Also, I had survived a near-deadly shark attack once. So
how bad could it be? Somehow, I convinced myself it would be like
Myanmar or Colombia, bad with the potential of being awful, but whatever
was thrown at me or wherever I was confined, I would figure it out.
Tom’s suggestion that I can just refuse to go seems revolutionary. I envy
his clarity of thought and, honestly, am filled with relief—and grateful to
Tom—for this paradigm-shifting notion that I could tell them no. But I
don’t say that. I’m too annoyed because he also suggests that I have
Stockholm syndrome. That I’m a victim who has come to regard my
“captors,” Sheryl, Elliot, and Marne, with trust and affection they don’t
deserve. Something about that comment stings but makes clear what I have
to do.
I begin a back-and-forth with Elliot, with Marne, and with the legal and
security teams, trying to extract myself from that Korean jail cell that’s
started to feel very real. I throw out different arguments hoping desperately

that one will work: that with a tiny breastfeeding baby at home it isn’t really
feasible for me to be indefinitely detained in an Asian prison. That there are
other crises around the world that need my attention. At times, it feels like it
would be easier negotiating with the Korean authorities for my freedom.
Finally, the thing that clinches it appears to be that they need me to be at
work, not in jail, in order to make Mark’s Asia trip a success.
That’s what gets them. Not concern for me and my family.
I take this in. This is the first time I’ve refused to do something they’ve
asked, and it’s a clarifying lesson. I can see my bosses a little more clearly.
And now I understand more about how they see me. It’s an uncomfortable
realization of how little they care, these people I’m with for sixty, seventy,
eighty hours a week. Facebook’s leaders aren’t the people I hoped they
were. And in retrospect, I should have thought a lot harder about this fact
than I did. But for the first time, I think maybe this place shouldn’t be my
home, not forever. Of course, I talk myself out of any drastic action like
quitting and finding a job somewhere else. The logistics of doing that with a
new baby seem daunting.
Predictably, one of the only other female directors on our team is sent
instead of me. She’s new to the team and looking to prove herself. Or
maybe she didn’t feel like she had a choice either.
She meets with Korean authorities and doesn’t get arrested. So—
presumably—the coast is clear for Mark and Sheryl and Elliot. We prepare
for the trip.

14
Five Settlers and One Billionaire in Catan
As I understand it, the first time you ride on a private jet you’re supposed to
act like you always ride on private jets. Or at least that’s what everyone else
did.
Long before we make it to this point, I’ve unintentionally made it
obvious that I am a random person from New Zealand, not a seasoned
executive used to private jet travel, by earnestly explaining to Mark—in one
of our trip preparation meetings—the different options for layovers en route
to Asia, and the amenities in various airports. I tried to convince him we
should stop in Singapore’s airport between flights, as it has a great
swimming pool.
Not one of the many coworkers in that meeting, including those I
consider friends, corrected me. Nor did Mark.
When I’m told I’ll be traveling on the private jet with Mark and the
Mteam, my first thought is all the frequent-flier miles I was hoping to rack
up on the trip. I’d been saving them, hoping to upgrade my grandmother
when she flies to New York to meet her great-grandchild. I broach this with
Debbie, who’s also going with Mark on the trip.
“Do you think anyone would mind too much if I just take a normal
flight?”
“Are you an idiot?” Debbie says, assuming that’s the end of the
conversation.
“Why would you say that?” It seemed a reasonable question. Facebook
has a generous travel policy.

“Do you know how valuable those seats are?” she asks, as if speaking to
a small child.
“I know literally nothing about private jets. I don’t even know if I’ve
ever seen one.”
“Don’t you understand that people would give anything to spend hours
jetting around the world with Mark Zuckerberg?”
This definitely had not factored into my thinking.
“There’s competition about who gets to be on those flights,” she
continues. “And it’s cutthroat.”
“Okay, okay, okay,” I interrupt. “Forget I asked.”
Once I’m onboard, I’m surprised by so many things on the private jet.
Like how difficult it is to figure out where the toilet is in the bathroom. The
whole bathroom is so refined that I push and pull on lots of levers and
handles in its leathery expanse. These reveal cupboards and drawers, but no
toilet appears. I can’t reemerge from the bathroom to ask without looking
like an imbecile, and the flight is long enough that there’s no choice but to
persevere and figure it out. Eventually I prod or lift something I thought
was a bench and miraculously a silver bowl appears from discreet
surrounds.
I’m also surprised by how beige and tan everything is. Not just the
bathroom, everything. Like an eighties boardroom. It’s boring. And devoid
of the things I usually rely on to get through flights: solid in-flight
entertainment, lots of food, and a little alcohol. There’s only one screen and
the only thing on it is a flight map. No one seems to request anything else.
Mark doesn’t have a working TV at home and seems completely
uninterested in anything like watching a movie. In terms of food, it’s
Mark’s favorite foods, which at this moment are fried chicken and
McDonald’s (which I feel sure would horrify Sheryl) or other fast-food
options, the type of fatty, salty food you eat when drinking. Although
there’s no chance of that here.
There’s also the fraught decision of where to sit. There’s obviously an
internal hierarchy within the team but I have no idea how this maps to the
geography of the plane. So as everybody boards and starts to settle in, I
stand around in the center of the jet like an idiot, hoping everyone will take

a place and through the process of elimination it will become clear which
seat is mine. When I end up sitting beside Mark, I can’t tell if this strategy
has worked or backfired but I suspect the latter.
Traveling with Mark’s inner circle makes me feel like an outsider. These are
people who are there to look after him, they’re used to spending day after
day together, and they’re used to a different kind of luxury. All of this
becomes very clear once we land in Indonesia. The place we’re staying—
the Amanjiwo resort—is spectacular. Mark doesn’t have the best room in
the place; he basically has an entire compound. To me it looks more like a
citadel than a suite. Large stone pillars support an expansive rotunda with
an excessively large daybed at its center, commanding gorgeous views of
lush rainforest on all sides. Steps cascade down the hill from the daybed to
an enormous private swimming pool, which looks like a public swimming
pool from my world.
When I arrive there for a senior staff get-together, Mark’s stretched out
on the daybed in his swimsuit, his white body propped up on some
cushions. It feels like I’ve stumbled into ancient Greece, though a toga and
laurel wreath would match the room better than his swimsuit. I half expect
someone to appear to feed him grapes, but instead we all make do with an
exotic fruit platter.
Mark announces that we should all go for a swim. I’m immediately self-
conscious about the whole swimming-with-my-bosses situation. I had
packed a bikini, which led Tom to ask why I need a bikini on a business
trip, but I guess my hope was that there’d be an opportunity to swim at
some of the hotels by myself. With work and the baby, I couldn’t remember
the last time I’d been able to go for a swim or do anything indulgent, just
for me. My life is entirely in service of the baby, my bosses, or basic
survival. Everything else is disappearing through disuse. Rightly or wrongly
I’d fixated on this swim, a few minutes by myself submerged and
unavailable, as the highlight of the trip. I hadn’t planned to climb into my
bikini and dive in next to Mark Zuckerberg.

It’s one thing to travel with your bosses. It’s another thing to get into your
bikini while doing so, especially when your stomach has visible shark jaw
marks and other very large, unmissable scars all over it from doctors who
weren’t thinking about your bikini body when they hacked you open. I
almost never tell anyone about the shark attack. I don’t want to be known as
the girl who got bit by a shark. I had that experience already, in high school.
Another issue: I’m still breastfeeding and pumping, and my bikini top
hasn’t really accounted for that whole situation. It’s fitting on me like a pair
of pasties. This wasn’t a problem when it was just going to be me
swimming by myself. Panic sets in, and I look around for another woman to
get guidance on whether to swim. Should I just watch everyone else get in
the water? Is there a nonswimming activity I could pivot everyone to?
But there are only two other women on this trip. Everyone at the citadel
is male, and they’re all sitting around talking about computer games. I start
to message Debbie, begging her to get here as fast as she can because I have
a breast bikini situation, but before I can hit Send I realize Mark is looking
over my shoulder.
“What’s that?”
My stomach drops, thinking Mark’s read my SOS bikini message—
which may or may not have included references to him and his swimming
trunks.
“It looks like Home. Is that like an ancient version of Chat Heads?” he
says, clearly disapproving. I can’t tell if it’s because Home was a failed
product—part of Facebook’s disastrous attempt at a Facebook phone—or
because he disapproves of my lax approach to updating my phone, or
because he’d managed to read my message.
“Ah, yeah. I’m not good about updating any tech. I’m more of a policy
person. Do you want to go over any of the briefings, preparation, protocol?”
I say, trying to distract from the swimsuit texts clearly visible on my screen.
“Now?” he says, surprised.
“Well, you know, always good to be prepared,” I say uneasily, aware
this is perhaps the world’s most unenticing offer. Let’s not swim and relax
in stunning surroundings. Let’s talk about policy and protocol.

“It’s the weekend. We’ve got plenty of time to prep. I’m going for a
swim now. You’re coming, right?”
“Ah, yes. I will. I just forgot something in my room, so I’m just going to
get that.”
“What?”
Panic doesn’t serve me well. “Just a thing I forgot.”
I turn and head toward the hotel lobby and find the gift shop.
Predictably, everything is doll sized to suit the bodies of the 1 percent— or
what look like tiny sizes to me and my breastfeeding breasts—but I manage
to find a one-piece and a cover-up that provide a modicum of modesty and
thankfully cover my shark bite–scarred stomach. The price is astronomical
and I blanch when the sales assistant tells me the total, but hand over my
credit card because we’re in a remote part of the backwaters of Java and I
don’t see any alternative other than baring my shark scars to my bosses.
I return to the pool to find Debbie posing for Instagram photos in a
fantastic skimpy bikini and feel suddenly overdressed in my one-piece and
cover-up.
Everyone swims and lazes about. Picks at the fruit platter. Mark sits in
his little rotunda, shooting the shit with the guys. I join them and I’m
surprised they’re talking about babies. I’m thrilled for an opportunity to
speak about what is actually preoccupying me, missing my baby. But that’s
not the direction the conversation goes in. Mark’s expecting his first child,
and he tells us he might not be present for the birth. As the only person
there who’s birthed a baby, I’m stunned. And genuinely curious. “What
would you be doing instead?” I asked him. Like, what in the world could
possibly be more meaningful to him than the birth of his first child? He had
no idea. Just “something more important might come up.”
He told us he’d discussed this with Priscilla and I was fascinated by her
response. Apparently she told Mark that she would be totally fine with him
skipping the delivery but that he might come to regret missing the birth of
his first child.
Well played.

At some point in the afternoon, Mark decides that we should all play board
games, but they’ve been left on the private jet, which is many miles away. I
assume that’ll be the end of it and we’ll come up with some other activity,
but hours later one of Mark’s security detail returns with the games. After a
dinner that, in keeping with the surroundings, felt more like a sumptuous
feast of ancient times with rose petals scattered everywhere and more
courses than I could count, we retire to one of the rooms in Mark’s complex
and start to play Settlers of Catan. It’s me, Debbie, Mark’s assistant Andrea,
Mark, and two of the guys from the communications team, Dex Torricke-
Barton and Derick Mains.
Everyone’s really into it despite the blatant nerdiness of it all, building
their little empires and strategically negotiating. But as the night wears on,
it becomes more and more obvious that people are letting Mark win.
Initially, it’s just small things, people not building near his settlements
or going soft when they negotiate with him. As the game continues, things
become more explicit, with people “stealing” from everyone but him and
never placing the “robber” on Mark’s empires. After a particularly
egregious move by Dex in which he uses the robber to block Debbie, who’s
closest to catching Mark on victory points, I cry out.
“You’re letting him win, Dex and Derick. You’re enabling it.”
I know it’s nerdy and I’m ashamed of myself for caring, but I can’t
choke it down anymore. Everyone looks suitably shocked by the
accusation. Dex and Debbie flash me looks of “don’t say this in front of
Mark.”
“What do you mean?” Dex asks brazenly.
“You know exactly what I mean. You could have placed the robber
anywhere but you never place it on any of Mark’s hexes. You always place
it on his closest competitor.”
“That’s ridiculous,” Dex says.
“It’s random,” Derick chimes in, offering support.
“No, it’s the parts that aren’t random that you’re swinging his way, the
negotiations where you’re saying no to everyone else and then yes
whenever he needs a resource, the robber, anything.”
They both look at me as if I’m crazy … for giving the game away.

“Can’t you see what they’re doing?” I appeal to Mark. “You don’t want
to win that way?”
“I’m not winning that way,” he says. He genuinely doesn’t see it. Seems
perplexed by my outburst.
I retreat to silence but shake my head at Dex and Derick and everyone
else who has agreed not to see what is really going on.
“You know what you’re doing,” I say quietly.
The accusation hangs in the air. Everyone pretends it doesn’t. I feel the
dynamics in the room shift and not in a good way.
The next morning we rise before dawn to climb Borobudur, an impressive
Buddhist temple, now a UNESCO World Heritage Site. I visited it a few
years ago. While we’re hanging out at the top, I notice some tourists trying
to take a photo and as I offer to take it, Mark cuts in and takes a quick snap.
They have no idea who he is but are thrilled with the photo and the whole
thing is very sweet. Mark is delighted. I can see he likes his newfound
common touch. I take a picture of Mark shooting their picture, which we
pass around and everyone showers Mark with love.
When later we tour the Hindu temple Prambanan—which the guys
overwhelmingly prefer because it’s just like in Tomb Raider—Mark
marches up to another group of tourists, clearly wanting to build out his
man-of-the-people vibe. They don’t speak English, so he reaches for their
phone to snap a photo. They rebuff him brusquely—like, What are you
doing? Get away from us! Mark looks astounded and a little hurt. He’s so
used to people walking up and asking for selfies and photos with him,
which he allows reluctantly, that he doesn’t know how to handle this
particular situation. His instant dejection is so comical that it’s hard not to
laugh, and I fail and laugh, which does not go over well. I pivot to
comforting him.
“If they ever realize, Mark, I’m sure they’ll be really sad,” I say. He
definitely doesn’t see the funny side of it and tries to rationalize his way out
of his embarrassment.
“Maybe they weren’t actually wanting a photo there.”

“Or maybe they thought you were trying to steal their phone?” I offer.
He looks crushed. He’s so utterly unprepared for rejection like this. And
I never see him offer to take another photo.

15
A Simple Request
This three-week-long Asia tour is going to be a real test for Mark. It’s his
first trip visiting multiple heads of state overseas, so I’m anticipating lots of
questions and requests from him. I didn’t anticipate the only request he
makes: a riot.
To be precise, his exact request is for a riot or a peace rally.
At first, I think he’s joking. Peace rallies are not my area of expertise,
and—to be frank—I’ve never been asked to organize a riot before.
Especially one for a tech CEO. I assume something has been lost in his
communication—that it’s some sort of mix-up. “Riot” and “peace rally” are
such completely different things. Then Debbie emails to say that she ran
into Mark and he told her that he wants a peace rally or a riot and we need
to come up with some ideas that will enable him to be surrounded by people
or be “gently mobbed.” I don’t really know what “gently mobbed” means,
so I push back against this whole idea. Debbie and I use the one argument
that might change his mind, and remind him of how badly starting a riot in
Asia would be viewed by the Chinese government. This does no good. He’s
insistent. And I realize he is definitely not joking.
If anything, he’s really hung up on the size of the crowd. That’s what
matters to him. A public rally of over one million people. That’s what he
wants more than anything. He never says why he wants this, and I don’t feel
I can ask. My guess is that he wants to test out how effective his product is
in turning Facebook’s online tools into offline power. Like, there are all

these people on the platform. Can’t we figure out a way to mobilize them?
Put them on the streets?
But irrespective of why, my job is now to start a riot.
That’s why I’m nervous when we land in Jakarta after our weekend
playing tourists in Java. By the time we make it to the Four Seasons, the
relaxed vacation atmosphere has definitely dissipated.
The tension gets ratcheted up further with some wardrobe issues.
Somewhere in the back-and-forth with various government officials, an
expectation was seeded that Mark would wear the traditional Indonesian
batik shirt, as a sign of respect, for his meeting with President-Elect Joko
Widodo. The shirt is wax-printed with bright colorful patterns and is
basically the opposite of what Mark wears every day. Early in the morning,
I deliver it to his suite at the Four Seasons. As soon as he sees it, he balks.
“There’s no way I’m wearing that.” Then he disappears back into his
bathroom.
I try to make myself and the loud shirt inconspicuous in his suite, but
we’re at a wardrobe stalemate. I’d told Mark that when we’re meeting
heads of state, he should plan to wear a suit, and it appears the batik shirt is
a bridge too far. I’m worried he’s going to revert to his usual uniform and
we’re going to have yet another hoodie battle. Like when he wanted to wear
his hoodie and T-shirt to meet the president of Mexico.
When he doesn’t emerge from the bathroom, I’m apprehensive. Mark
still hasn’t prepped for this meeting with the president-elect of Indonesia.
The only prep time is now. And yet our scheduled departure time comes and
goes. It’s nearly 9:00 A.M. and we’re still at the hotel. We’re going to be late
and unprepared, especially as traffic in Jakarta is unforgiving. And yet we
sit there, Mark’s assistant Andrea and I, waiting for Mark to reemerge in
whatever clothes he deigns to wear.
We trade tense smiles as we wait. She’s a Chinese American former
gymnast who uses busyness as a sword and shield. Not one for polite
chitchat. Eventually, she slips into Mark’s bathroom and I hear unexpected
giggles.
Finally, Mark pops his head out of the bathroom.
“I split my pants.”

This wasn’t a problem I had foreseen. He usually wears jeans. While we
have backup shirts to deal with the sweat issue, we don’t have backup
pants. But somehow Andrea has managed to mend the pants amid the
giggles in the bathroom. The president’s people are now calling me,
wanting to know where we are and why it’s not city hall, where we’re
supposed to be. I choose to blame traffic rather than pants to explain our
delay. By the time we pull up at city hall we’re seriously late. I push
everyone out of the van as fast as possible.
I’m so focused on getting to the meeting as quickly as we can that it’s
not until I’ve reached the top of the stairs in front of city hall that I realize
chaos has broken out. A swarm of people envelop us and it’s rough. Some
of it’s press, some isn’t, and they’re shouting and jostling us, forcing
themselves between us, separating the Facebook team. They catch sight of
Mark and everything kicks up a notch. There’s a frenzy to get to him. As we
try to get through the doors of city hall, the crowd surges and I’m lifted out
of my high heels and carried forward, my feet not touching the ground.
I find Elliot’s hand and grab it as I’m buffeted from side to side. I scan
the melee trying to spot Mark. We’ve had some intense pre-trip security
briefings, delivered by buff Israelis whose qualifications for the role I try
not to think too hard about. They’ve taken our fingerprints to identify us in
hostage situations, giving me visions of my fingers being individually
mailed to Facebook’s headquarters. Now I start to worry that this mob scene
could all be a setup. Like some Batman movie before someone gets taken
hostage from city hall in the chaos.
I see Debbie and then Mark—who’s with Todd, the head of our security
detail. Todd is a huge guy, ex-military. He’s holding an Indonesian man by
the scruff of his neck, his muscular arm pulled back, fist balled, about to
punch the guy square in the face.
We later learn that this guy he’s about to punch is the head of the
Indonesian president-elect’s security detail, and apparently a two-star
general. Which is funny, but only in retrospect. At the time, it’s pure
adrenaline and terror.
This isn’t even the riot I organized.

The crowd continues to surge forward into the lobby and Elliot loses his
grip on me. Now I can’t see anything because I’m too short and someone
stomps on my feet. In the shock of pain, I’m pushed around the crowd and
then eventually emerge in the clear. The crowd moves on. I can’t see
anyone from our team. It dawns on me that they’ve already gone into the
meeting room with the president-elect without me. I rush toward the door,
which is guarded. But before I charge in, I spot my shoes, lonely and askew,
in the lobby of the grand entrance. I go back for them, wipe the blood off
my bruised feet, and put them on, knowing that it probably doesn’t help me
look any more professional, I’m so disheveled from the humid brawl.
Expecting some kind of pushback from the guards, I thrust my way into
the meeting room and loudly disrupt what is clearly the quiet, polite
protocol part of the meeting where Mark is asking the president-elect about
his priorities. I awkwardly greet the president-elect in a studied Bahasa
Indonesian phrase and sit down in the space Mark makes near him.
The room’s crowded. I’d spent weeks negotiating the number of people
who’d be here, to ensure we had similar numbers on both sides, but all
those negotiations have obviously been ignored. This whole thing is a free-
for-all. I can identify some of the ministers and officials in the room, but
sitting beside the president-elect is a guy who is definitely not a government
official. He has shaggy long hair, a short-sleeved shirt with sunglasses
perched near his collar, and a large chain hanging between his jeans and
back pocket. He looks like he’s lost his way to a nightclub, and I’m
completely confused to see him seated at the right hand of the president-
elect.
The conversation restarts after I’m seated but as the president-elect
starts to outline his priorities, the door swings wide open again and Debbie
bounds into the room, interrupting him again. This disruption gives me the
chance to quietly ask Elliot who the guy is who’s seated beside the
president.
“Apparently he’s a famous Indonesian pop star,” Elliot whispers.

“Riiiiight?” I say uncertainly, still waiting to understand what is
happening. “Why’s he here?”
“Big fan of Facebook.”
“Aren’t we all?”
Elliot shrugs and I start taking notes—ready to prompt Mark or the
president-elect if we drift off the areas of discussion that we’d
prenegotiated: tax issues, content issues in this predominantly Muslim
country, and their demand for Facebook to store Indonesian user data in
Indonesia.
This whole thing had been difficult for me to set up, because President-
Elect Widodo has been keeping a low profile since winning the election,
and he’s acutely aware that meeting with Mark Zuckerberg would get
incredible press scrutiny—which we’d just experienced in the flesh. It’s
also delicate politically for him and for us, because we’re not meeting with
the sitting president. And because Facebook’s an American company. This
is one of the first public things the president-elect has decided to do since
winning the election. It’s risky.
I couldn’t understand why he agreed to do this, but watching him, I
come to realize the debt he feels to Facebook for getting elected. He really
believes it wouldn’t have happened without us.
“I’m the Facebook president!” he says. He’s so earnest and almost
innocent in the way he speaks, it’s hard not to be charmed and disarmed by
him. “I wasn’t supposed to win, I’m a carpenter after all, but I could talk
directly to people through Facebook.”
And it was true. Jokowi (that’s what everyone calls him) is a relatively
young outsider, a clean break from a line of presidents who were known for
their corruption and cronyism. He’d used Facebook and the internet in
interesting ways, like inviting people to vote on Facebook for which
ministers they’d like to see in his cabinet. That’s why I wanted Mark to
meet with him right at the beginning of his administration. He’s of the
internet, a new type of head of state born of the new Facebook politics. At
this moment, I’m still so convinced of the positive power of Facebook that
it doesn’t occur to me that Facebook could push things the other way,
toward a different type of candidate. In different ways, Jokowi and Mark

both have this youthful optimism and sense that they shouldn’t quite be
where they are. And that seems like a good thing.

16
Just Keep Driving
After the meeting ends, the question of the “riot” I organized hangs in the
air. The president-elect is famous for blusukan, where he makes
spontaneous visits to villages and city slums to walk around, connect with
people, and understand what communities are worried about. These are
popular, and researching it I learn that he gets what is described as “gently
mobbed,” which seems to me exactly what Mark ordered and the right
balance between riot, rally, and million-person event. I’d convinced the
president-elect’s team to have Mark join him on a blusukan, despite some
initial skepticism, especially from my team.
“This will end badly” is Debbie’s response when I let her know about
my small victory in winning over Jokowi.
Mark seems up for it when we arrive in Jakarta, but then the president-
elect’s security team raises the issue of a sniper. The risk of one being used
during a blusukan in the lead-up to the inauguration, that is. Mark’s
assistant Andrea shuts the whole thing down before we even arrive at city
hall.
So it’s surprising, at the press conference after the meeting, when
someone from the president-elect’s office comes to chat with me about the
blusukan that Mark will be doing with Jokowi. I let him know it’s been
canceled, and he corrects me. “No, the location has been moved for security
reasons but it’s going ahead.”
After the city hall mayhem this morning, I’m scared.

Mark is standing next to the president-elect for the formal photo op and
I pull him aside.
“The president wants to do the blusukan.”
He beams. “Cool. Yeah. Let’s do it.”
I then tell Elliot.
“Absolutely no way. Not happening.”
“Well, you better tell Mark because he just said he wanted to do it.”
Elliot goes to Mark. The press and I watch him whispering in Mark’s
ear. One of the formal photos from our press conference with the president-
elect shows Elliot doing a very theatrical whisper into Mark’s ear. His lips
are forming the “o” sound of the word “no.”
We’re then unexpectedly led into an ornate anteroom. The president-
elect explains to Mark that his security people are out “sweeping the route.”
I’m behind them petrified because we’ve used up all the talking points in
the briefing, and no one is prepped to just hang out indefinitely with a
president-elect. I suspect this is well out of Mark’s comfort zone, given that
he barely does small talk at the best of times, with people he actually
knows.
Out of the corner of my eye I see Elliot striding toward me purposefully.
“Have you told the president that the blusukan is off?” he asks.
I gesture helplessly at the president-elect and Mark chatting and
drinking tea and say, “Is that my place? I mean, do I tell presidents what to
do?” noting privately that Elliot’s not offering to speak to the president-
elect himself.
“You seem to have no problem telling them what to do before now.”
I suspect he’s joking but he probably isn’t.
“They both seem to want to do it and there’s a security sweep happening
now. Whose decision is it?” I ask, genuinely unsure.
Elliot walks over to Mark and the president-elect and—as the two of
them continue their conversation—leans in and whispers sternly in Mark’s
ear. Mark looks over at me. I shrug. And then he turns to Elliot and shakes
his head. Elliot returns to my side.
“He still wants to do it. This is madness, after what we went through on
the way in here. It’s not safe. You need to speak to their side and shut it

down.”
I spend the next ten minutes ping-ponging between various officials in
the president-elect’s entourage, Mark, our security detail, Elliot, and back
again before Mark stands and follows the president-elect to his vehicle,
carefully avoiding Elliot like he’s worried that Elliot might abduct him.
And then he’s gone. With the president-elect.
Elliot and I catch sight of Todd, the head of the security detail, whose
whole job is to stay close to Mark and protect him, now not with Mark.
Todd is very stressed.
“Get in the van,” he instructs firmly. “Now.”
I can’t tell if it’s because of the snipers, the chaos earlier, the fact that
Mark is separated from his security detail, or my worries about what in the
world he’ll be saying as he speeds along with the president-elect, but there’s
absolute silence in our van as we twist and turn through the Jakarta streets
chasing the president-elect’s motorcade.
I’m surprised when we come to a stop outside a shopping mall because the
president-elect’s team had said the blusukan would take place at a nearby
slum. We all jump out to try to locate Jokowi and Mark. Within moments
we’re overtaken by people, tens of people at first, but soon it’s hundreds—
swarming, clawing, pushing, pulling, waves of people, nothing but bodies. I
attach myself to Elliot again.
People are overcome. Bowing, clapping, weeping, outbursts of violent
emotion as if this moment in this shopping mall in Jakarta is the second
coming, but it’s not for Mark. They’re only interested in the president-elect.
I catch sight of Todd trying to make his way through the swarms of
people and realize he’s living a security professional’s worst nightmare. As
we’re knocked around, our little team tries to anchor to each other, but our
sweaty hands keep slipping and we have to push our way back toward Mark
and the president-elect. They seem to be basking in the adulation, enjoying
the rush of the crowd, the waves of emotion, and each other’s company. As
they move from stall to stall chatting with people, it’s like a scene from a
buddy movie, one with a large budget for extras. Eventually we’re pushed

toward the exit and Todd bundles Mark and the rest of us into the van
before yelling at the driver to go as fast as we can to escape the crowds that
are trying to climb in and on the van.
As we pull out I can see Elliot is incandescent with rage and it feels like
99 percent of that is being directed at me. I suspect this may be the last time
I organize a head of state visit or a gentle riot.
Mark turns to us, pauses to make sure he has our attention before he
renders his verdict, and I feel sick, like there are squirrels in my stomach.
I’m anxious that he’s also livid about the security risk I exposed him to, or
possibly all the small talk he had to do with the president-elect. It honestly
seems possible I’m about to be fired.
“That. Was. Awesome,” Mark exclaims. His eyes are more alive than
I’ve ever seen them, face flushed, beaming with pure joy.
“Not for Todd,” someone pipes up from the back of the van.
“Did you see how much they love him? That crowd was crazy for him.
I’ve never seen anything like it. I’ve never seen a crowd like it.”
This from a man who is used to getting a lot of attention. For once, he’s
seen something and someone bigger than him, someone with more impact,
someone who people are personally devoted to.
I can tell it’s affected him deeply, as he relays everything that was said
when he was hanging with the president-elect, adrenaline still pumping. But
he keeps going back to that crowd, how big it was, how much they loved
the president-elect. We speed through the crowded streets and onto the
motorway, miles from the shopping mall, before someone realizes that in
our haste we’ve left a member of our communications team behind, and
they are lost and alone in the swarm of the Indonesian crowd.
“Just keep driving,” Elliot instructs from the back of the van.
And we do.

17
Going Down in a Blaze of Glory
When we get to the South Korea portion of the Asia tour, Sheryl joins us.
I’ve tried to get a meeting for Mark and Sheryl with the president of Korea,
and the president’s office didn’t dismiss it out of hand. They politely
inquired whether we have any announcements about any “investments”
we’ll be making in Korea—casually mentioning that Google had opened a
campus in Seoul when they asked to meet the president. But Facebook’s
pretty cheap about that kind of thing. And I’m not surprised when our
refusal to “pay to play”—combined with the open arrest warrants for Mark
and Sheryl—means that the president is unavailable to see us.
Mark and the team meet with Samsung, but nothing big comes of it.
After a long dinner at Samsung’s headquarters, there’s a karaoke party
just for the Facebook team staffed by Korean DJs. Mark gives it his all on
the Backstreet Boys’ “I Want It That Way” lyrics. The party spills over to
the private jet flight from Seoul to Tokyo. There’s a smaller group traveling
on. Elliot and Sheryl have gone back to the US and it’s mainly guys on the
business and growth teams left. Everyone’s drinking. Before long an in-
flight karaoke system appears and the party on the plane kicks it up a notch.
Without Sheryl or any senior women, things are crazier than on the ground
in Seoul. The guys are dancing and goofing off. Mark is back at it again
with the Backstreet Boys, interspersed with Adele and Disney—“A Whole
New World” from Aladdin—and I perch at the back of the plane just trying
to make myself as invisible as possible, not sure what the etiquette of this
situation requires. I suppose I could find this charming and vulnerable,

Mark trying so earnestly to sound like a Disney cartoon character and the
Backstreet Boys. But somehow it makes him seem so much smaller. Like a
kid. Honestly it feels a little sad. This is what he does to cut loose? I’m
exhausted and missing my baby. It’s a physical thing, the absence of her,
not having her on my body. Not being able to hold her and smell her. That
baby is a whole world to me. I scroll through photos Tom has sent and feel
alone.
About halfway through the flight we strike turbulence. I’ve flown a lot
and am a very relaxed traveler, but this is a magnitude I’ve never
experienced. Even the captain and flight attendant seem worried. The flight
attendant belts herself into her seat and hugs herself with both arms. The
captain comes over the PA several times urging everyone to sit down and
belt up. Nobody listens but me. The plane lurches up and down violently. It
shudders and rattles, like a flimsy toy being slapped around in the sky.
Somehow this just makes the party more frenzied. Someone puts Bon Jovi
on the karaoke system and the guys drunkenly belt out the line, “Going
down in a blaze of glory.” On the word “down” the plane drops again. They
take turns on the verse and then boom out “Going down in a blaze of glory”
together. In the back, the flight attendant and I catch each other’s eye and
share a look. Her eyes squeeze shut with each plunge.
Traveling is when you really get to know someone, and this is the trip
where I start to really get to know Mark. I think he feels the same because
during this trip, he friends me on Facebook.
As we hang out at temples and the Tokyo fish market, karaoke, and
ridiculous Michelin-star restaurants that specialize in fried food of course,
we talk about all kinds of things. I’m fascinated about how you think about
life when you’re one of the richest people in the world. What changes?
What doesn’t?
Being dropped into this world of luxury hotels, private jets, infinity
pools, and personal concierge service, I feel as if the furniture in my home
has all suddenly been massively upgraded but time and the fundamentals of

what I do all day—eat, sleep, work—don’t change at all. But what’s it like
for him?
Sheryl once explained the cycle of wealth to me as she saw it. I was
complaining that someone I really admired had retired from Facebook at a
very young age. I couldn’t understand why they’d do that. What would they
do instead that would be so interesting? She said matter-of-factly that they
would probably follow the cycle of wealth she’d observed at Google and
Facebook: exotic travel for a year or more before becoming bored of that,
then transitioning to getting very fit or some other personal goal. After
achieving that goal, buying a boat or some other extravagant hobby
purchase, and then finally getting divorced or going through some other
personal crisis. If they come back from that, maybe they attempt their own
start-up or fund or, most likely, philanthropy.
None of this sounds very enticing.
Given the scale of Mark’s affluence, what actually matters to him? It’s
unfathomable to me. This endless wealth. I try to explain that to him over
dinner.
“I was actually talking about this with Masa the other day,” Mark
responds. Masayoshi Son is CEO of SoftBank, a Japanese conglomerate
that invests heavily in technology companies, including many of the buzzy
start-ups Mark’s interested in. “And we both agree.”
“Agree on what?”
“The most important thing.”
“What is it?”
“Food,” he says, lifting a chopstick toward his mouth. A dangling piece
of fried deliciousness hangs in the air near his lips.
“Are you serious?”
“Yeah. I mean, he’s even more serious about it than I am. Every day he
has someone go to that fish market we went to this morning and buy the
absolute best bluefin tuna in that market. He eats the best food in the world.
He has the best chef in Japan.”
During my time working on environmental issues, one of the things I’d
been involved in was trying to protect southern bluefin tuna, which are
critically endangered. I know that a single fish can sell for millions of

dollars. I also know that efforts to regulate and save the fishery are seriously
failing, and the reason those fish command such high prices is because they
are rare and at risk of extinction. It’s as if he’s saying the best thing about
being rich is eating fresh, tender, endangered baby elephants or munching
on little imperiled panda bears.
“I didn’t think you even liked tuna. You like McDonald’s and fried
chicken,” I say, puzzled and also, if I’m honest, really hoping he’s not about
to tell me he wants to eat endangered species himself.
“True. As soon as I knew there was a three-star Michelin fried-food
restaurant in Japan, I knew we all had to try it.”
“Right—but that’s because you like fried food. You don’t need to be the
richest guy in the world to have fried chicken and McDonald’s every day.”
“No, but if I want the best bluefin tuna…”
I cut him off. “You’re going to have to fight Masa for it. But what else?”
“Well, Kevin introduced me to his wine dealer.” I know Kevin is Kevin
Systrom, cofounder of Instagram.
“You don’t really drink wine, though.”
“No, but I love Andrew Jackson.”
There are a lot of downsides to being foreign, but an undisputed benefit
is that you can ask dumb questions, simply because you want to hear how
someone answers them. I know Mark doesn’t particularly care for alcohol,
but he now tells me he’s collecting either sherry or port, I never know the
difference, and what matters to him isn’t the alcohol itself but that it’s from
when Andrew Jackson was president. So I ask him who Andrew Jackson is
and why he likes him so much. Mark explains that Jackson’s the greatest
president America has ever had, that he was ruthless, a populist and an
individualist, and that he “got stuff done.” He also spilled a lot of blood
expanding the territory of the United States, sent five Native tribes out onto
the Trail of Tears, but Mark doesn’t mention that.
“What about Lincoln or Roosevelt?” I ask, pushing my foreigner
credentials. “Wouldn’t you say they got stuff done? Couldn’t one of them
be the greatest?”
“No,” Mark says firmly. “It’s Jackson. It’s not even close.”

After his blusukan with the Indonesian president-elect, and his first
experience of wild, politically fueled adoration, a switch seems like it’s
been flipped in Mark. As we prep for Prime Minister Abe, he asks searching
questions in a way he never has before—How do elections work in Japan?
Why did Prime Minister Abe resign and return? Who holds power in Japan,
is it the emperor or the prime minister?
By the time we meet with Abe, it feels a little like coming home. We’re
really starting to build solid diplomatic relationships in several countries,
and the relationship between Facebook and Japan is much better than most.
It’s the same staff I dealt with for Sheryl’s visit a year before. Same venue.
Similar format. I make a point to remember to wear a different dress.
When he walks in, Prime Minister Abe comes over to me immediately
and smiles.
“Good to see you again. You just always look so young,” he says to me,
which given Japan’s hierarchical and patriarchal society is probably not a
compliment. Then he turns to Mark and says, “Wow, you also look so
young.”
Mark smiles gracefully and, defusing what could be an awkward
moment, he responds, “I guess that’s because I am.”
Abe beams. The rest of the meeting feels like progress. Like what I’d
imagined this tech diplomacy would be. Abe has followed through on
things we’d discussed with Sheryl, like legalizing the use of social media in
elections in Japan. And we’d followed through on things we’d offered, like
the disaster response tool, a way for people to mark themselves “safe”
notifying all their friends and family—which of course had been inspired by
the 2011 earthquake and tsunami in Japan. This tool was personal for me
after Christchurch; I’d had to wrangle engineers and design teams, and it’s
one of the first pieces of engineering that also feels like a policy project. An
intersection between tech and the good things we can do to help people and
countries.
While we’re there, Abe announces the launch of the disaster response
tool and praises it to the press, even though his office had told me several
times before the meeting that the prime minister never endorses products
and never makes exceptions.

When Abe promises to visit Facebook’s headquarters, I know he’ll
follow through. We’ve established something that for so long felt
impossible—an embryonic statecraft for Facebook—and Mark, as our
founder and CEO, is the face of it.
But I didn’t follow the team where they were going next on our tour. I
knew it had the potential to make any progress we’d made come crashing
down.
They were heading to China.

18
Red Flag
For Mark, it’s hard to imagine a future for Facebook that doesn’t include
China. The country already has nearly 650 million people on the internet,
more than twice the entire US population.
For most of 2014, he’s been putting a lot of time and energy into getting
Facebook into China. A few months before the trip, he sent an email to his
closest advisers explaining why:
From: Mark Zuckerberg
Date: July 25, 2014, at 9:51:37 A.M. PDT
To: Sheryl Sandberg, Elliot Schrage, Vaughan Smith, Kevin Systrom
Subject: China 3-year plan
I’ve said recently that I’d be willing to take 3 trips to China per year and to engage more
intensively in trying to help us operate there. I’ve also encouraged Kevin [Systrom] to engage
more as well. Some of you have seemed surprised by this, so I wanted to provide some
context on why I believe it is time to take this more seriously. In our mission to connect the
world, there have always been a few difficult problems we’ve always said we’d get to
eventually: connecting those who can’t afford the internet, building satellites for those who
don’t have any connectivity infra, and connecting countries where we’re blocked like China.
We’ve now made progress on every single other major problem, and the last one on the list is
China.
He says everyone needs to tackle this intensively right away, if Facebook’s
going to get into China anytime soon. Instagram is already in China—and I
suspect that’s one of the reasons it was such an attractive acquisition target
for him.

If we don’t, it’s most likely we’ll regress and all of our services—including Instagram—will
be blocked.… I think we should view this as a 3-year plan to have Facebook fully operational
there. In year one, we can aim to have key services like Instagram remain up and running, and
we should try to get our sales office running with a senior Chinese leader. By the end of year
three, we should have hopefully built the relationships that would enable Facebook to operate
in China as well. (In the best outcome, it may be the case that Instagram becomes the
Facebook of China and the Facebook app’s full success is not as necessary.)
He ends with one more bit of context on why we have to do this now:
We’ve always needed to connect China, but there have always been other major projects we
could take on to connect large populations instead. Now there are no other major projects left.
It’s time to really build these relationships and make this partnership with China work.
What’s not in Mark’s email is more telling than what is. There’s no
acknowledgment at all of the moral complexity of working in an
authoritarian country that surveils its own citizens and doesn’t allow free
speech.
This is July 2014. Google has already withdrawn from China, years
before, saying it was “no longer willing to continue censoring” Google
products following the breach of human rights activists’ accounts on its
service. Mark, Sheryl, and Elliot all know this well. Both Sheryl and Elliot
were senior executives at Google during that period. Elliot even testified
before Congress about Google’s China strategy, a bruising affair in which
he and a Yahoo executive were condemned for colluding with the Chinese
government. “While technologically and financially you are giants, morally
you are pygmies,” the chair of the House Foreign Affairs Committee told
Yahoo.
But after all that, there’s no question in Mark’s email of “Should we
operate in China?” or “How do we manage the inevitable moral dilemmas
that are sure to come?” China is, in Mark’s eyes, just the end of a to-do list,
the last major project to tackle. Like he’s playing a game of Risk and he
needs to occupy every territory.
I don’t believe Facebook is going to get into China. The mission of the
company—making the world more open and connected—is the exact
opposite of what the Chinese Communist Party wants, particularly under
President Xi Jinping. I can’t imagine they’d allow us in. And I don’t want to
help Facebook try. The way I see it, the only way in will be to collaborate

with the CCP and make compromises we shouldn’t. I tell Marne and I think
she gets it. She takes on nearly all the China-related tasks herself.
Mark, meanwhile, is learning Mandarin. He tells people he’s studying
every day, and he gets together with Mandarin-speaking employees for
conversational practice. Eventually, he’s interviewed in Mandarin, onstage
in a classroom full of Chinese students. The video of this is completely
charming; he’s loose and self-deprecating and funny. The students cheer
and burst into applause when he first busts out his badly accented
Mandarin. “I need some practice after all,” he tells them, and they laugh.
“My wife is Chinese”—more laughter and applause. “We speak Mandarin
to her grandmother.” When the footage is posted on YouTube, many people
comment that he has more personality—he seems more human, cooler, and
more relaxed—in Mandarin than he ever seems in English.
For the longest time, Marne had been leading the policy work on China,
with the Asia business team managing the day-to-day. But while I am out
on maternity leave in early 2014, Facebook announces a new leader for the
China team. Instead of bringing in someone with specific experience in
China, they tap Vaughan Smith from Facebook’s corporate development
team. He’d been working on mobile partnerships at Facebook after
previously working at eBay. This is consistent with Facebook’s approach to
everything; they prioritize insiders over outsiders, business experience over
policy expertise (China expertise, in this case), which seems like madness
to me. By coincidence, Vaughan’s also a Kiwi and attended the same high
school my mother taught at and my brother went to, plus university in
Christchurch, my hometown.
Vaughan’s an affable, enthusiastic guy who talks quickly and always
seems to have pep in his step. I like him. It’s hard not to. He’s wiry, maybe
because of the cycling, waterskiing, and other sporty leisure activities that
he mysteriously seems to have ample time to pursue—unlike his American
coworkers, who seem to have no time for leisure. His friendly features are
complemented by sandy hair, blue eyes, and a thick New Zealand accent.
Several people tell me—the only other Kiwi they know—stories in which
Vaughan has insisted on “showing them his deck.” The New Zealand accent
turns e’s into i’s, so it sounds like a lewd proposition rather than a business

invitation to review some slides. Javi apparently responded, “No, man, no! I
don’t wanna see that.” Vaughan’s the sort of guy who laughs that off, the
misunderstanding being a feature, not a bug. He seems immune to any kind
of social mortification, and glows with a kind of cheerful, locker-room
bonhomie.
Vaughan often hosts people in his palatial Palo Alto home, where his
very good-looking family mingles with assorted Facebook staff around their
outdoor fire pit or swimming pool, depending on the season. Vaughan
presents as—and I have no reason to doubt this—a man who has everything
he wants.
Vaughan operates in a different way from me and most of the policy
team. He decides to crack the China market with his golf clubs, sending
updates about whom he has golfed with and how this might lead to
opportunities to meet with key government officials. The actual work,
preparing 
briefings, 
tracking 
regulations, 
or 
analyzing 
political
developments, he delegates to interns, or the women who work for him.
Sometimes Vaughan seems oblivious to important facts. He schedules
Mark’s visit during the fourth plenum, arguably the busiest week of the year
for China’s top officials, who are all expected to attend the Communist
Party’s main policy-setting conference. Vaughan only seems to realize the
plenum’s happening a week or two before departure.
With Vaughan still settling into the role and only days after Mark sends
his China email, we learn that Instagram, which is still operating in China,
might be blocked. In fact, there are rumors the Chinese might go a step
further and remove Instagram from both the Apple and Android stores in
China.
The sudden threat to ban the service inconveniently highlights how little
Facebook can control its fate in China, with no direct communication from
the Chinese government before their announcement, and no ability to stop
the block or even know when exactly it will happen.
While others panic, Vaughan, from the ninth hole, is the only person
who shrugs it off.
“Bummer as China has been Instagram’s fastest growing country for a
while and could have passed the US as our #1 country in 2015 had the

previous trajectory continued.”
Instead he focuses on setting up a physical office for Facebook in
China, and pursuing a partnership that’ll help the platform enter China. He’s
targeting venture capital firm Sequoia, private equity boss Stephen
Schwarzman, and information technology company China Broadband,
among others. Anyone who might be able to get Facebook in.
I still can’t figure out what his strategy is. Until I get a glimpse of how the
team is thinking about Hong Kong and China. I’m cc’d on an email from a
junior staffer. It’s about a letter Facebook promised the privacy
commissioner in Hong Kong, responding to questions about the privacy of
Facebook users there:
Update: Rob and I spoke with Vaughan and Zhen on the China team yesterday, and they
flagged a potential complication arising from the likely course of our negotiations with the
Chinese government. In exchange for the ability to establish operations in China, FB will
agree to grant the Chinese government access to Chinese users’ data—including
Hongkongese users’ data.
Facebook will grant the Chinese government access to Chinese users’ data
—including Hong Kong users’ data—in exchange for getting into China?
This can’t be true. It’s one of those crazy ideas the other offices at Facebook
are always floating that Marne and I beat back down before they go very
far. This proposal, which would surely violate the consent order Facebook
agreed to with the Federal Trade Commission in 2012 (and the earlier 2011
agreement with the Irish Data Protection Commission), doubtless is the
work of juniors who haven’t subjected it to any scrutiny by the actual
decision makers at Facebook. This is so far-fetched I’m sure there’s no
danger of it becoming real anytime soon or ever. So I ignore it, even though
the next sentence in the email explains exactly how Facebook would
accomplish this:
New users in China will agree to a modified DUP/SRR reflecting this practice, but we will
have to re-TOS Hongkongese users.

Translation: new users in China will have a new Data Use Policy they’ll
agree to when they sign up for Facebook—a policy that discloses that the
Chinese government will have access to their data—and existing users in
Hong Kong will be forced to accept a new Terms of Service (the contract
Facebook has with its users) that will also contain this stipulation.
Again, I don’t buy it. It sounds so unlikely that the company would use
the data of Hong Kong users as a bargaining chip to get Facebook into
China, and then force Hong Kong users to accept it with a new Terms of
Service that they must consent to or lose access to Facebook, that I assume
the people on the email—who are US privacy experts and not especially
senior—have simply misunderstood. Surely, there’s no way that Facebook
would leverage Hong Kong users’ data as part of a deal to get into China?
Later—just a few months later—I’d learn no, no … this was how the
head of the China project was thinking things would play out. But I’ll get to
that.
In the meantime, the rest of us are trying to figure out why China is
threatening to block Instagram. Why this aggressive move now? We don’t
know for sure, but we suspect that it’s Instagram’s role in protests in Hong
Kong. Tens of thousands of prodemocracy activists are taking to the streets
in the Umbrella Revolution, and Instagram is one of their preferred ways to
organize and get the message out, in part because it’s not blocked in
mainland China. The Chinese activist Ai Weiwei posts a selfie holding his
own leg and aiming it like a rifle. It becomes an instant meme; Hong Kong
protesters photograph themselves in the pose and post on Instagram to
symbolize their own demands, along with the main protest hashtags.
Another possible reason for this potential block is that, back during the
Hong Kong elections a few months before this, in March 2014, Facebook
deployed a megaphone to encourage people to vote. China makes it clear
that Facebook should not have run the megaphone or taken any actions to
increase democratic engagement. In-house, it’s seen as a mistake, a black
mark against the policy team. I escape blame only because I was on
maternity leave at the time.

As the protests in Hong Kong escalate over the summer months, in
September China makes good on its threat and Instagram is blocked
completely in China. Vaughan’s cheery updates start to take a less
optimistic tone. Less golfing, more gloom.
Before this China trip, we have to figure out what both Mark and
Vaughan will say about Hong Kong’s Umbrella Revolution both publicly
and in private. In an email, Vaughan suggests:
“My pov is it’s a good opportunity to talk about the rule of law and
praise HK.”
In other words, support China’s violent suppression of the protests by
parroting its claim that it was upholding the rule of law. Praise Hong Kong
means praise for Beijing’s puppets on the island who support the
crackdown.
I’m shocked. Everyone else seems to be also. Debbie fires back an
email in response to Vaughan’s suggested talking points. She starts:
I think only very skilled people will be able to do this well.
Devastating. Then:
I feel we say something very bland
I do not want to talk about rule of law
“Like everyone around the world, we continue to watch with interest the events in HK and the
peaceful demonstrations of the HK people.”
Maybe fearing that Vaughan won’t understand why Debbie’s correct, Elliot
chimes in:
Debbie is 100% right here.
Vaughan, you need to appreciate that “respecting the rule of law” only goes so far to explain
or justify government behavior. To many people who follow human rights issues and
international law, the foundation of international law is the rejection of the so-called
Nuremberg defense—the claim by Nazi’s that they “were just following orders” and
respecting the laws and policies of the Nazi state.
Vaughan simply thanks Elliot for “the articulate background.” I can’t tell if
he’s being brazen or genuine. There is simply no putting this man off his

putt.
Either way, I think the point at which you have to explain Nuremberg to
the head of the team leading your China entry is probably a red flag.

19
PAC-Man
Not long after I return home from the Asia trip, Marne leaves the policy
team to become the COO of Instagram. After years of being connected to
her via email almost every waking moment, I feel an unexpected sense of
loss.
She’s replaced by Joel Kaplan. It isn’t a complete surprise. Joel, the
former Bush aide, is coming from the role of vice president for US policy.
Plus, he’s Sheryl’s ex-boyfriend, and by now I’ve realized that Facebook’s
leadership includes a web of people all entangled as bridesmaids, best
friends, neighbors, and exes. Their fealty is seemingly to each other, their
tribe, ahead of any ideology or anything else. Their pasts, presents, and
futures are all deeply intertwined in a way that mine are not. They hire each
other for jobs with big salaries, responsible for each other’s promotions and
bonuses. A tiny enmeshed group of people increasingly responsible for
shaping the attention of billions. Their preferences turned into policy. The
challenge is that Joel doesn’t seem to have any interest in the world outside
the US or even outside Washington, DC. His career and passion is
Republican politics. He didn’t just serve two full terms in the George W.
Bush administration (eventually rising to deputy chief of staff), he was part
of the “Brooks Brothers riot” in 2000 that helped put Bush into office. This
was the melee that shut down the Florida recount in 2000, ensuring that
Florida went for Bush. During Joel’s confirmation hearing, he claimed,
“While I was there, I was not, to the best of my recollection, a participant,”
but his memory seemed way better by the time he was at Facebook, sharing

stories over drinks after work about the craziness of participating in the
riots.
At the White House, he was intimately involved in the response to the
2008 financial crisis, and he remained bitter about Andrew Ross Sorkin’s
account of his role in the book Too Big to Fail, where he felt the importance
of his role was downplayed and he was portrayed as a confused frat boy,
desperate for information to feed back to President Bush, who had given
him the nickname “angular dude.”
I’m surprised to learn, again over drinks, that he had initially been a
Democrat. I would eventually see some irony in his stated reason for
breaking with the party, but he’s adamant that Bill Clinton’s behavior with
Monica Lewinsky turned him into a Republican.
At Sheryl’s urging, he was offered the job of general counsel in
Facebook’s early days, but he found the suggestion that he leave the White
House for a college website preposterous. Now he ruefully acknowledges a
certain jealousy of Ted Ullyot—another Harvard grad, Scalia clerk, and
Bush alum—who did take the job. I don’t think that’s just about the
immense wealth he initially missed out on. He’s openly bitter about how
those who stayed until the very end of the Bush administration were treated.
In Joel’s telling, he’s still surprised by the meager career offerings that were
available to him. When he eventually joins Facebook, he makes clear that
he’ll only consider the job if he doesn’t have to interview for it. His first
position is running US policy. Because Facebook is so heavily aligned with
the Democrats, it needs someone who can handle Republicans.
Now in his newest role, as vice president of public policy, Joel’s a very
different boss from Marne. Where Marne had been deliberative, thorough,
ever questioning, Joel’s her opposite, impetuous and dogmatic. Joel sees
everything through the lens of US power. Facebook, like the US, is a
superpower. When something goes wrong outside the US, he reflexively
turns to the State Department to task them to solve it. Almost like he
considers them an arm of Facebook. When the island nation of Nauru
blocks Facebook out of the blue, Joel contacts the State Department to have
the US government publicly condemn the block. Which they do. It changes

nothing. I urge him, in this case and others, to reach out ourselves. Figure
out why the government blocked us and contact them directly to resolve it.
Joel is surprised to learn Taiwan is an island. Often when we start to talk
about pressing issues in some country in Latin America or Asia, he stops
and asks me to explain where the country is. This happens so frequently that
a few weeks into his tenure, I offer to buy him a world map. He turns that
down, but days later, a large framed map shows up in his office.
Just a few weeks after he takes over Marne’s job, Joel starts hiring a
political sales team to push politicians—here and abroad—into becoming
advertisers. The idea is, if politicians depend on Facebook to win elections,
they’ll be less likely to do anything that’ll harm Facebook. If Facebook is
the goose that lays the golden egg, no one wants to kill the goose. Get them
hooked on those golden eggs. Also, unlike Marne, Joel wants the policy
team to generate revenue. The way he sees it, Facebook is a business and
the policy team should be contributing to the bottom line. He doesn’t want
to be viewed as a “cost center” internally. Political advertising is a way to
change that. And elections are the biggest opportunity. Fresh-faced Harvard
grads start moving into the Washington, DC, office to sell ads to politicians
and political campaigns.
I find this all repugnant. I feel alienated from this new regime from the
outset. As a foreigner, I have a very different perspective on money in
elections. New Zealand, like so many other countries, has strict limits on
electoral spending: under 27,500 New Zealand dollars per candidate. I’m
astounded at the role money plays in elections in the US. It determines so
much about whose voice gets heard on every issue from guns to abortion to
much else. I’m also against exporting this value system. But Facebook is
effectively bringing this in globally by stealth.
The result? In Brazil, Facebook’s already facing fines of millions of
dollars and court orders to block the platform for violating bans on electoral
advertising. In Mexico, Facebook is being investigated for defying
restrictions on political ads.
My disagreements with Joel come to a head when he tells me to
establish PACs in other countries. Political action committees, of course,
are an American invention that pull together donors to give money to

political candidates. There are PACs for every possible cause: to elect more
women to office and to elect candidates who are friendly to Realtors, or
beer wholesalers, or teachers’ unions. Home Depot runs its own giant PAC,
as does AT&T.
“We were so late in establishing Facebook’s PAC in the US; I don’t
want to make that mistake in other countries,” Joel says insistently. “We
need to get moving to establish PACs outside the US. We should have done
this a long time—”
“So, this is awkward,” I cut in. Joel looks puzzled.
“That’s illegal. Only US citizens can contribute to elections here. That’s
true everywhere. Nobody wants foreigners bankrolling their elections.”
“Really?” Joel looks shocked.
“Definitely. That’s why even though you regularly invite me to
contribute to the Facebook PAC you founded, for me to do so would be
illegal as I’m not a citizen.”
“Well, I was actually meaning the other way,” he says defensively.
“Contributions to politicians in other countries. We need to get moving on
channeling money to our key allies offshore, you know, our most influential
politicians in other countries.”
“Ah, that would be considered bribery and corruption in most of the
countries I’m responsible for,” I say, careful to strike a neutral tone.
Joel looks crestfallen.
“Except the dictatorships,” I offer. “They’ll probably take your money.”
For a minute I worry that he’s seriously considering it.

20
Slouching Toward Autocracy
Joel isn’t the only one starting to flex on foreign policy. So is Mark.
The first time I see it is Russia. An event page has been set up for a rally
in support of the country’s opposition leader Alexei Navalny, on the day
he’s going to be sentenced for trumped-up embezzlement charges: January
15, 2015. Over sixty thousand people are invited to the event and over
twelve thousand respond. But Facebook staff block the event page in Russia
the Friday before Christmas, after receiving a complaint from Russia’s
internet regulator, the wonderfully named Roskomnadzor.
Facebook gets a lot of criticism for this, including in the tech
community and on sites like Techmeme, which Mark is particularly
sensitive to. He’s really annoyed the issue wasn’t escalated to him.
Sheryl writes to him on Sunday, December 21, 2014, at 9:17 A.M.,
defending her policy team:
Mark—this is the right course of action to take to balance free expression with staying up in
Russia—and it is consistent with how we deal with requests. This is certainly small compared
to potential China requests and will be noted by them too.
BUT, if you were optimizing for free expression / tech community only, you would restore
these pages quickly.
The team’s actions here are consistent with the guidance they have from you. This could
become bigger and be negative in the tech community—so if you want to restore pages,
please let us know now. If not, we sit tight.
Hours later, at 1:34 P.M., Mark replies:

I spoke with Elliot about this yesterday.
My view is that for such a sensitive case, this should have been escalated to me (or at the very
least Elliot) before we took it down in the first place. My guidance at that point would have
been to try to push back on the request rather than immediately taking it down.
At the end of the day, however, since the request actually is fully compliant with Russian law,
if we really came to believe not taking this down would cause the whole service (including
this page) to be blocked, then I would have supported taking the page down. We aren’t
helping anyone if the whole service becomes unavailable.
From there, Mark lays out our options. He says we can’t unblock the page
now because at this point it probably will get Facebook shut down in
Russia.
On the flip side, it will also look incredibly weak for us if we unblock the page and then block
it again within a few days if the whole service is about to be blocked.
To make a complicated decision worse, the State Department gets in
touch to relay its “concern” at Facebook’s removing the event page for the
Navalny rally. Joel has a surprisingly brief and unfriendly phone call with
them. The State Department official tells him that if faced with the choice
of removing an event page like this one or being shut down in some
country, the US government position is that Facebook should be shut down.
And that’s not all.
The kicker is that the government threatens to publicly criticize
Facebook to pressure the company to take a principled approach.
Joel is shocked at this, that the government would prefer for a US
company to shut down its operations rather than comply with another
government’s legal request. He fumes on email, “I reacted with
astonishment and asked whether he was sure that was the official U.S.
government position, because I had never heard that articulated before and
found it extremely surprising. I told him that if it ever got to the point where
he thought the U.S. government was going to suggest as much [say publicly
that Facebook should let itself be blocked], then I’d want a heads up,
because I knew that Mark or Sheryl would want to talk to Secretary Kerry
directly.”

Elliot responds, “Wow—these guys really don’t understand how soft
power works.”
He and Joel start putting together plans to “tell them that this is not how
we expect to work with our own government.”
Joel rings me after he’s had a bruising discussion with Mark, who
wanted to understand “the facts” about how content is removed from
Facebook. He’s now thinking that instead of having the content operations
team follow the same rules they’ve followed for years, all requests for
removal of content from “sensitive countries” should be escalated,
potentially to Mark. Certainly to Joel and Elliot.
What Mark’s really mad about over that frenzied holiday weekend is
that he sees the decision as his to make. Which is mystifying to the content
operations and policy teams who’ve been applying the Community
Standards and making difficult decisions like this for years. Until now,
they’d escalate particularly hard decisions to Marne, occasionally to Elliot,
and rarely to Sheryl. No one can remember ever escalating this type of
decision to Mark. But now, two months after our Asia trip, Mark’s interest
in the politics of these decisions is growing. Now, for the first time, he
wants to be the decider.
It’s painful to see, given how much work went into putting those
guidelines in place. The system we developed isn’t perfect, but it has checks
and balances, and isn’t guided by just one man’s whims. When I arrived at
Facebook in 2011, the rules were extraordinarily crude and decisions were
made by a team that reported to the vice president in charge of global sales.
The team hated taking anything down. They pushed back nearly all
requests. Then we had a series of troubling incidents. The office of
Australian prime minister Tony Abbott asked us to remove a page called
“Occupy Tony Abbott’s Daughters’ Vaginas.” Someone at a consumer
packaged goods company reached out to Sheryl to complain that their ads
appeared on a page called “Riding her gently while she sleeps” and another
with a name that was something like “She bites the pillow while I enter the
backdoor.” The content team used the same arguments they had for keeping
beheading videos on the platform and fought ferociously against taking
down any of these pages. After this, the content team was swiftly removed

from the sales operation and put in the public policy team under Marne. She
ordered a summit to develop a set of principles and processes for what can
and cannot be posted on Facebook. After many philosophical and practical
debates, and getting myself personally invested in way too many arguments
with bearded guys about John Stuart Mill, we agree on Facebook’s first
Community Standards. It felt like progress to have the policy and
operations teams come together and develop a set of principles that would
guide decision-making for all content on Facebook. I wanted to make these
public, so users everywhere would know what the rules are. This would also
make us more accountable, ensuring everyone at Facebook followed the
same clear principles. And we do.
Navalny is the starting point for Mark wanting to overrule this imperfect
but functional system. And as time wears on and weirder and more
inconvenient facts present themselves, Mark steps in more and more.
Mark decides to block a video of the aftermath of a Mexican school
shooting when the president of Mexico reaches out to him personally; he
blocks some Indonesian political speech threatening a coup against his
buddy President Jokowi; he blocks political speech that the South Korean
National Election Commission wants removed.
Most of those decisions are contrary to the Community Standards. The ones
we’ve made public. He’s replacing the process we’ve developed over years
with whatever he thinks is right. And there doesn’t seem to be any form of
accountability. It’s also hard not to notice that in nearly every case, his
decision happens to coincide with his business interests, mollifying
governments so he can keep Facebook growing.
It starts to feel like all the guidelines we’d spent years endlessly
haggling over and refining are irrelevant. The new test on difficult decisions
about government requests is whether there’s a risk that Facebook will be
blocked if we don’t comply. It’s just a question of blunt power.
Around this time—while he’s personally ordering us to take down posts
that don’t violate our Community Standards—Mark starts opining publicly
about freedom of speech. The day after the Charlie Hebdo attack, where

twelve people were murdered, he posts, “This is what we all need to reject
—a group of extremists trying to silence the voices and opinions of
everyone else around the world. I won’t let that happen on Facebook. I’m
committed to building a service where you can speak freely without fear of
violence.”
In our offices around the world, there’s a sense of whiplash. The people
I’ve hired are confused about these departures from policy. When we gather
the entire policy and communications organization together for an annual
offsite meeting at headquarters in February 2015, Joel outlines what he sees
as Mark’s new approach. When governments ask us to take down content
that we believe should not come down, he says, it will only be taken down
if one of two criteria is met:
1. There is a credible threat to block Facebook.
2. There is a risk to employees.
The team peppers me with questions. How can they possibly tell if the
government is going to shut down Facebook in their country? How can they
escalate to Mark? What if we guess wrong about the risk and then they’re in
jail and it’s too late?
It’s five dozen people at this meeting, in a big conference room on
Facebook’s campus—and the ones objecting the most are recent hires from
South Korea, Brazil, and other places where governments have shown a
willingness to arrest or use a show of force against employees:
“How can Mark understand the politics in my country?”
“How can he overrule it?”
“How can we defy the government making legal requests and then ask
to work with them?”
“How can we say our rules are one thing but actually they are another?”
These are the very people most at risk from this decision. It’s them, not
Mark, who are most likely to be jailed if push comes to shove.
Joel’s response? He’s frustrated and can’t understand their confusion,
seething at what he sees as insolence and ignorance. The audacity of
questioning authority. Basically, management issues the orders and

employees outside the US are expected to comply. He lectures the team that
Mark’s been clear on the two principles. Everything stays up unless
Facebook is going to be blocked or someone is arrested and sitting in a jail
cell with no way out. How many times does he have to say it?
Everyone seems shocked that there’s no discussion or input—just an
edict from Mark, enforced by Joel. They struggle to understand why Mark’s
getting involved, why instead of the set of rules we tout to governments,
decisions are made on his whim.
What Joel and Mark are doing, whether they realize it or not, is sending
an unfortunate message to governments around the world. If the only thing
that will make Facebook change its position is jailing its employees or
blocking its service, they’re effectively issuing an invitation to these
governments to do just that.
After this, we escalate all difficult decisions to Sheryl and Mark for them to
decide. Although in reality it’s just Mark. Facebook is an autocracy of one.

21
Billionaire Time
Good news from Colombia. President Santos has agreed to be our knight in
shining armor and get onstage with Mark Zuckerberg to show the leaders of
Latin America that it’s a great time to sign up for Internet.org. This will
happen in January 2015.
There’s just one snag: convincing Mark to do this in the morning, which
is the only slot that’s free in the president’s schedule. Santos’s staff is clear
with us that they’re squeezing Facebook in as a favor, while the president is
in the middle of heated negotiations trying to get the FARC militant group
to lay down their arms. However, Mark’s assistant Andrea is firm that noon
is too early for Mark. She insists on 12:30 P.M. or later. Mark has spent a
lifetime staying up late into the night coding, and has a strict policy: no
appointments before noon. Which works at home; there are few people in
Silicon Valley who aren’t going to accommodate him. He owns time. But
presidents are different. Turns out, they’re very busy, tightly scheduled
people. It creates enormous issues all the time. It’s hard not to feel like
“Who does Mark think he is?” Like his time is more valuable than that of
someone involved in a delicate peace process to end a brutal fifty-year-old
conflict?
Back when he was a freshman in college, in an interview with the
Harvard 
college 
paper 
the 
Crimson 
(about 
the 
brand-new
“TheFacebook.com”), Mark actually said, “Not having someone tell me
what to do or a timeframe in which to do it is the luxury I am looking for in
my life.”

A week before the trip, this scheduling issue—Mark’s refusal to meet in
the morning—scuttles the whole thing. But this one’s too important to miss.
I’m called in to mediate between their palace and our palace. Andrea holds
firm at 12:30 P.M., and after much coaxing the president’s staff concede to
12:15 P.M. The plans are back on until a day before the event, when Andrea
lets the palace know we’ll be there at 12:30 P.M. They respond—confirming
the meeting for 12:00 P.M., their original time. At this point both sides
remove me from the emails.
The morning of the meeting, Mark hasn’t read the briefings I prepared
for him. Andrea’s insistent that I brief him in the car, on the drive to the
presidential palace, and she’ll message me when Mark is ready to depart. I
wait, watching the clock, assuming we’re supposed to arrive before noon, to
get through security and past the press scrum.
At 11:23 A.M. my phone pings. It’s Andrea:
“Here? We are leaving. Soon. About to be in cars. Where are you? We
are in the garage loading.”
I’d been waiting in the lobby for an hour. I head down and text, “In lift.
Here. At S1. Where are you?”
“You are not at S1. I’m at elevators. We are ready to go. Where are
you?”
Something was badly wrong. That’s when we all realize that they’re at
the Bogotá Marriott and I’m at the JW Marriott Bogotá. Two separate
hotels, far from each other.
I’m told to meet Mark at the presidential palace. I google and learn that
the hotel I’m currently standing in is forty minutes away. The hotel Mark is
currently in on the other side of Bogotá is at least fifty minutes in traffic and
that’s being optimistic. The meeting with the president is now due to start in
less than thirty minutes.
My mind and my body process the horror of what is unfolding
separately. There are no taxis at the hotel. Before I know it, I’m starting to
run. Vaguely in the direction of the palace. It’s hot and muggy. I’m
desperately scanning the street for taxis.
My phone rings; it’s a very nervous Derick, from the comms team, at
the palace. He’s wanting to know when Mark and I are going to arrive.

When I explain I’m not with Mark and I’m not anywhere near the
presidential palace, Derick calmly asks what I need. Transport.
“Didn’t someone hire a van?” Derick directs me to run down a main
calle toward the palace in the hope that the driver can spot me. I take off my
heels and run barefoot as fast as I can, conscious that every second could be
the difference between making it or failing. Little stones jab into my feet.
Eventually, I see a white van and we speed to the palace.
I watch with dread as the van’s clock ticks past noon. When we get to
the palace, military police block us. Of course. I should have realized I
couldn’t use an unmarked white van to charge into the Colombian
president’s palace.
After clearing this up, I’m whisked from the van to pandemonium in the
palace, and marched directly to a stern man in a green uniform replete with
medals. He’s red-faced with anger. He doesn’t bother with the usual
pretense of diplomatic niceties. He just demands to know where Mark is.
I can’t answer because I genuinely have no idea. But President Santos is
waiting to receive him. I can’t even bear to look at the time or look at
Derick. He sidles up beside me and explains that it’s worse than I think and
that the president is clearly pissed, after waiting for ages.
The minister of information technology approaches, the man whose
ministerial van I’d ridden in for our road trip through the Colombian jungle.
He’d stuck his neck out to make this meeting happen during the middle of
peace talks. He looks crushed. This is not good for him.
I try to assure the minister that Mark is nearly here at the same time
Derick takes a call from Andrea, wherever she and Mark are. Derick recaps
the call to me in a whisper—Andrea has told the president’s office that
Mark’s flight was late landing and tells Derick that we should do the same.
I’m stunned she thinks this lie will work. Doesn’t she realize they can
check? Who does she think controls the airspace? They flew in last night.
When Mark does finally arrive, we’re marched upstairs to the president’s
office. No one acknowledges our lateness, but it is clearly understood and
extremely uncomfortable.

We sit down. Mark seems awkward and off his game just making small
talk. The president opens by telling us he has to go talk to the FARC. He
explains they’re at an especially difficult stage; there’d been a deadly bomb
attack a few weeks before, and the whole thing is at risk of collapsing. He
says he wants to build support in Colombia for the peace process and wants
Facebook to help him get this over the line. Mark seems flustered, with the
wide eyes of a man who has not read his brief. He isn’t prepared to talk
about the FARC. But he offers to do all Facebook can to facilitate the
process. (Facebook doesn’t do anything significant. In fact, months later,
after the peace process is concluded, Joel refuses to allow FARC-related
content on the platform, despite direct requests from the president’s office.)
We all can feel this meeting will be over any minute even though it has
hardly begun. Mark brings up Internet.org, tries to explain how it will help
people in remote parts of Colombia. We’d put two Colombian government
sites in the app—one for agriculture and one for education—and Mark
pitches adding more. Santos is noncommittal and ends the meeting after
less than ten minutes, saying, “We can’t keep the press waiting any longer.”
We decamp to a different room, where Santos interviews Mark onstage
for a little over half an hour. The original plan had been for an hour and a
half; they were supposed to take questions from entrepreneurs and press in
the audience, and then exit together. Instead, Santos gets up and walks out,
along with his retinue. Mark is left standing onstage alone.
Before this meeting, the minister and the president said Colombia would
lead Internet.org globally. They’d put all government services into the app,
not just the couple we launched with. We talked about sending the minister
around the Americas promoting Internet.org. After this, we can’t get them to
do anything.

22
Hunger Games for the 0.001 Percent
Here’s something you don’t see in Davos: children. In fact, everyone seems
like they’re middle aged or old or very, very old. But in 2015 I decide to
bring my eleven-month-old daughter, Sasha.
Davos is what people call the World Economic Forum—the annual
meeting of the high-flying people who think they run the planet—
billionaires and world leaders and celebrities (the Clooneys, Kevin Spacey
back in the day, Bono of course). It’s a festival for the important and the
self-important, held in the ski town of Davos, Switzerland.
One of the conceits of Davos is that the logistics are incredibly difficult,
and that’s if you’re a billionaire with a large staff. It’s a ridiculous place to
hold anything. The location is high up in the remote Swiss mountains in the
dead of winter. Getting there requires a flight to Zurich followed by a long
drive through treacherous icy, windy roads, or train, or—if you’re one of
the top attendees (and not staff like me)—helicopter. The town is tiny, one
main street surrounded by ski chalets. The scarcity of hotel rooms,
restaurants, and convenience stores seems to be the point.
I’ve managed Facebook’s presence at Davos for years, but this time,
Tom’s also going to be there, on assignment for the Financial Times. So we
have to bring the baby. When I confide in other staffers about this plan, they
say, alarmed, “Don’t let Sheryl know. She needs to know all your attention
is on her.” Which told me all I really need to know about Sheryl’s real
attitude to combining work and motherhood. In fact, when a woman I work
with closely expresses surprise upon learning I have a child, she tells me,

“Good job!”—openly admiring the fact that she’d had no idea—and I feel a
flush of pride. Both of us acknowledging the success (and the necessity) of
the subterfuge.
I decide we’ll be smuggling our daughter to Davos. Tom disapproves
but suggests no alternative. We decide reluctantly that the only thing to do
is to bring our nanny to watch Sasha while we’re working. We’ve never
traveled with her before and it feels like a big ask, but she’s excited to go.
We’re traveling in the dead of winter and the baby gets sick. After 4:00
A.M. in the seventies-inspired faux log cabin of the Sheraton Hotel Davos,
when Sasha vomits into my hair again, as the three of us lie in bed
exhausted and unsleeping in the stiflingly hot room, Tom turns to me and
says, “This is, beyond doubt, the worst idea we have ever had. I am never
coming to Davos again.” And he keeps his word.
Around this dull Swiss town, the World Economic Forum has
constructed a byzantine social structure where they control the minimal
resources available. These are then dished out by their grace and favor
according to status. Everything at Davos—every speaking slot, every car
pass, every drinks invitation, every meeting room, the distance you sit at
dinner from the front table—is distributed according to social status. The
ultimate type A personalities at Davos understand these minute power
calibrations and spend their time comparing each and every one, constantly
striving for more. So you overhear people saying sniffily that they’re
surprised that a certain prime minister is staying in the Hilton Garden Inn
rather than the Seehof Hotel, or that a celebrity mistakenly tried to cut in
line for a panel, too uneducated to realize they were pushing past a Nobel
laureate. The narcissism of small differences.
In other words, the WEF has weaponized the concept of status envy to
create a Hunger Games for the 0.001 percent. Maybe that’s why they all
seem to love this place. It’s like the status Olympics—a chance for them to
measure themselves not just against their own industry but across business,
politics, entertainment, and media. A bunch of the richest people in the
world.
Know who this setup is not so great for? Anyone trying to do their job
with a baby in tow. Know who it’s made for? Sheryl Sandberg. At Davos,

every cell in her body is tingling, primed and hard at work weighing,
assessing, and measuring whom we should stop to speak to, who gets a
selfie, whom we share information with or give swag to, and who has
committed some past slight that renders them ineligible for even a polite
head nod. And they’re all doing this! Being around all this constant
calculation is exhausting.
Since I arrived at Facebook, we’ve made Davos into the moment each
year when we pause and assess how things are going around the world for
Facebook. We go into it with a “bible” I take months to pull together,
summarizing every issue of importance to Facebook, and preparing talking
points. It’s like taking Facebook finals each year. We come out of it with an
email Sheryl writes, after meeting with politicians, regulators, and
journalists at the conference, setting the policy direction for the year ahead.
This year at Davos, Sheryl and Joel are taken aback to hear—from their
own kind—that things are not looking so rosy for Facebook. Joel emerges
from a meeting with a senior editor of the Wall Street Journal looking like
someone has handed him a grenade ready to explode. The guy told him,
“Everyone’s currently going after Google but you’re next.” He warned Joel
that media, regulators, and high-level politicians around the world are all
lining up to start to “rein in Facebook.” One of Sheryl’s former Treasury
colleagues tells her, “You all are two years away from being as hated as the
investment banks.”
The Italian prime minister tells us that he and his counterparts in Europe are
struggling with unemployment and slowing economic growth, and the tech
companies are seen as leeches, sucking money out of their countries and not
creating jobs, making investments, or paying tax. At dinner, the UK
chancellor of the exchequer George Osborne hits the same note, saying that
Facebook isn’t “paying its fair share.” I agree with this. Facebook deploys
something called a “double Irish” to avoid paying taxes. It’s something
Google and Apple do as well. The way the double Irish works is that when
one of these companies makes a dollar selling ads (or iPhones in Apple’s
case) in Italy or Germany or elsewhere in the European Union, that revenue

can be shifted to Ireland for tax purposes, and then on to a tax-haven
country like Bermuda that charges no taxes at all. To do this, the companies
have to set up subsidiaries in Ireland and transfer their foreign IP rights to
those subsidiaries. What Ireland gets out of the deal is big Google and
Apple and Facebook operations located on their soil, with thousands of
local employees earning good wages. Those employees pay taxes to Ireland,
even if the tech companies don’t. After years of controversy and opposition,
the EU had just forced Ireland to shut down the boondoggle a few months
before Davos.
This makes our next meeting with Irish prime minister Enda Kenny
particularly important. Before Facebook, I’d never been in the rooms where
the sausage gets made with world leaders. I’d assumed WEF would be like
my experience at the United Nations, where for all its flaws, things still had
a feeling of idealism to them. A sense that is absent in these Davos
meetings. There’s no pretense that Facebook is out for anything but
ourselves. It’s brazen. By this point I know I shouldn’t be surprised but it
still makes me recoil.
We get together in the WEF Strategic Partners Lounge, a bland room in
the Davos Congress Centre packed with temporary furniture. Unlike the
setting, Kenny is charming, a charismatic man who occasionally recites
poetry from memory or sings in the raucous dinners he hosts each year at
Davos. “Ahh, the beautiful ladies of Facebook,” he says as he greets Sheryl
and me. Coming from another man, this would be creepy. Somehow, from
him, it’s almost charming. He hugs Sheryl, embraces me. Kenny has a sense
of mischief. One year at Davos, tipsy after dinner, he breaks me and
Sheryl’s assistant Sadie into a beyond-exclusive wine party thrown by an
obscenely wealthy private equity guy, telling us, “Come, you’ll never have
better wine in your life.” He barrels past security into a dark room where a
bunch of somber-looking men are sipping from glasses and literally taking
notes, declaring brightly, “Someone get these gorgeous ladies some wine.”
And we’re begrudgingly handed the most expensive wine I’ve ever tasted in
my life.
Kenny has been one of Facebook’s firmest allies since the beginning,
and the Irish have gone above and beyond to court our business. Sheryl

often tells the story about how she decided to locate the Facebook European
headquarters in Ireland in 2008, after the Irish government gave her a
special phone when she landed in the country on her first business trip. The
phone connected her to someone in the Irish government who could solve
any problem or address any accommodation she needed. Every time she
meets an Irish politician she brings it up, and sure enough she starts this
meeting by praising the phone and telling the prime minister, “I told folks at
the White House that they should be like the Irish government, because you
are so good to business. That phone!”
Kenny starts with some feel-good chat on how much the government is
relying on Facebook to reach citizens, and how Facebook is positively
impacting Ireland. Then we get down to brass tacks. With the EU quashing
the double Irish, is Facebook going to stay in Ireland? Google and Twitter
have publicly committed to keeping their operations going, but Facebook
hasn’t.
Sheryl says, “I appreciate that there was substantial pressure and
scrutiny this year on global tax rules and arrangements,” and thanks Kenny
for his “careful” and “considered” handling of it. What she’s thanking him
for is an additional five years of double Irish for Facebook and the other
tech companies that Kenny had somehow wangled. We’re protected from
tax until 2020. But what comes after that?
I feel sorry for him. I know that’s not the right response to tax
avoidance, but Ireland has severe austerity measures in place. This man
needs the economic boost Facebook’s international headquarters provides.
It’s hard to know what he can give that will satisfy Sheryl. He’d already
promised her at Davos three years ago that even if European countries make
him tax Facebook, he won’t raise the corporate tax above what it is now in
Ireland: 12.5 percent. (In comparison, it’s 35 percent in the US.) Of course,
12.5 percent is a lot more than nothing, which is what Facebook is currently
paying.
Kenny starts explaining the pressure he’s facing. “Now, you know
Ireland had no choice but to comply with what these other countries.…”
Sheryl interrupts. “Did you know Facebook has over five hundred
employees from fifty-four nations based in Dublin, and we’ve just leased a

building with capacity for over two thousand employees?”
“Have I told you about the Knowledge Development Box?” Kenny asks
with a twinkle in his eye.
“Sarah, stop taking notes,” Sheryl instructs, knowing Kenny’s about to
tell us how he’s going to keep the gravy train going for us. She doesn’t want
it written down. My notes can be subpoenaed. So this part of the meeting
will be “off the books.” “Is this the thing that you told Marne you were
focused on, to make us happy? The IP initiative?”
“Oh yes,” replies Kenny, before he describes a new tax scheme that will
allow companies like Facebook to separate out “income from intellectual
property” and pay half of Ireland’s already low tax rate. “Details are still
being negotiated.”
“We’ll have our team help shape them,” Sheryl insists.
So is this what it looks like when a company conspires with a
government to avoid paying taxes? I know Kenny’s just trying to do right
by his people and keep a bunch of jobs in Ireland. But still. It doesn’t feel
right, this backroom deal.
Before the meeting closes, Prime Minister Kenny has a favor to ask.
Europe is steaming about privacy and Facebook, and they’re about to adopt
a law—the General Data Protection Regulation—to crack down on how Big
Tech uses personal data. Exactly who will enforce this law is still being
negotiated. Kenny wants it to be Ireland. We do too. But we’ve got a
problem because no one believes Ireland will be tough enough on the tech
companies. With good reason. Kenny needs to make it seem like his
regulator—the Irish Data Protection Commission—is on the case right now,
doing proper oversight, a watchdog Europe can trust with this
responsibility. “Ireland’s been criticized,” he says, which is true, and asks if
we can assist in “building up the credibility” of his regulator by talking
publicly about its audits of Facebook privacy, and the changes we’ve made
because of it. In other words, we should tell the world the lapdog has been a
pit bull. Of course Sheryl agrees to this.
As soon as the prime minister leaves, Sheryl turns to me and says,
“Taxes.”
“Were you not happy with what he offered?”

“Maybe. But whatever happens in Ireland, taxes are coming our way
throughout the world. Especially in Europe. I don’t think we can escape it.
The current tax structure is too hated to last.”
It’s Joel’s first time at Davos, a place he assumed he was going to hate
because (in his words) “my people”—that is, Republicans—hate this sort of
globalist gathering. But instead, he’s having the time of his life.
I find him scooping up tiramisu out of a large catering-size glass dish
that he has lifted out of the buffet and is eating all by himself, with a fork,
in the middle of the congress center.
“Hey, look at this! Everyone said there wouldn’t be any food at Davos
and I’d be hungry for days and look at me. I’ve got a whole tub of tiramisu.
I love tiramisu.”
“See, isn’t Davos great,” I respond, almost successfully masking my
sarcasm. “I thought ‘your people’ didn’t come to this particular shindig.”
“So did I, but it turns out there’s a bunch of people I know here.”
“Your country club friends? Harvard? DC? Bush administration?
Federalist Society friends? Supreme Court? General global elite?”
“All of it.”
He smiles triumphantly and scoops up another forkful of tiramisu.
As darkness falls in Davos, I half skid, half run back to the hotel to
order some room service ice cream and quietly sing “Happy Birthday” to
Sasha before she goes to sleep. It’s exactly a year since I received the
request for talking points for Davos while I was in the stirrups about to
deliver her. I bundle this sweet baby into bed and myself back into snow
clothes to race back to brief Sheryl and Joel on their next meetings. I am
questioning all my life choices. I want to be at home, with my baby and my
husband and my new “mom friends.” Surely having a kid and a career is not
meant to be like this? I know I’m expected to work as if I don’t have
children, but I didn’t expect it would feel like this. There’s a grief to it. I’m
still committed to the mission, but it feels like the cost is too high. Though
this is what Marne and Sheryl both do. This is the Lean In workplace.

And I haven’t learned the difference between knowing when to quit and
knowing when to persevere.
Joel is very impressed with what he calls his “sweet boots,” cowboy-
inspired snow boots that set him apart as a Republican in this liberal elite
milieu. He sends me a photo of himself wearing the boots, saying, “Look
how smaht [sic] my boots are. I think I might be able to get away with
wearing them to meetings? What do you think?” He regularly asks me to
admire the boots and in subsequent emails to me refers to them exclusively
as his “stylin’ boots.” As we move from meeting to meeting across Davos,
he makes a point of racing off in his boots and telling me to “hurry and
catch up, you’re not pregnant now.”
Just before midnight he realizes he’s lost them and throws a late-night
tantrum. He copies me on an email to other staff titled FYI that simply
states, “SWW lost my sweet boots,” so I understand the extent of his
displeasure. Despite the fact I had nothing to do with him losing his boots.
And this is how I find myself—when I want to be cuddled up in bed with
my sick birthday baby—crawling on my hands and knees through the
various coatracks at the congress center in Davos to find the boots—which
he accidentally left at a coat check. At 12:58 A.M., I email him, “I have your
boots.”
It’s not always the things you think that will bring you to your knees.
In Sheryl’s Davos apartment, she starts to prepare her “Lessons of
Davos” email that she’ll send to Mark and leadership when we fly out. This
will set our policy direction for the rest of the year.
I suggest that she tell leadership we need to take the storms on the
horizon seriously. European leaders are telling us that things aren’t right—
they’ve noticed Facebook is making gobs of money from their citizens and
that isn’t translating into jobs or money for them. They’re not happy. At the
moment they’re being reasonable and asking Facebook to find a way to
invest, but it’s clear that’s going to change. I actually believe it’s only fair
that Facebook should pay more taxes, and that’s what I suggest. It’s not a
crazy idea. Starbucks had just volunteered to scrap its tax-dodging tactics

and pay more tax in the UK, agreeing to contribute as much corporate tax in
2015 as it did in its first fourteen years in the country. Compromising now
on taxes is not just the right thing to do, I say. Giving a little now is smart
strategy; it might prevent worse regulations and taxes later.
Sheryl ignores me, as if I hadn’t said anything. Seriously, it’s so off the
map she doesn’t even bother to respond. Instead she taps out her conclusion
to Mark and the rest of the Facebook executives: “The best thing we can do
is invest in getting policy-makers to use Facebook to communicate and
politicians to win elections.”
This is how Sheryl wants us to address the growing hatred toward
Facebook and the regulations and taxes that are likely to come. Facebook
has an ace that the other tech companies don’t; we can make Facebook
essential to electoral success. The more that politicians are indebted to
Facebook, the better it is for us: “Where policy makers have a positive
experience using Facebook for campaigns or governance, they’re more
open to partnering with us to address policy issues.” It’s a shift that will
have far-reaching consequences.
After this, Facebook invests heavily in campaigns and elections around
the world. Sheryl directs Joel to hire teams in Asia and Latin America and
Europe. They’ll coach politicians on how to target specific messages to
specific sorts of voters, and they’ll sell them ads. Make them reliant on
Facebook for their power. This is what Joel’s been wanting to do for a while
now, and what he has been doing on a small scale. Now he gets a mandate
to supercharge it. As he launches into this hiring spree, I fight it best as I
can. I think this approach will only end badly. I think we’ll get too close to
people who lose  … which could alienate whoever wins. And in other
places, I think we’ll get too close to objectionable people who do vile things
and win office with our help. That won’t be good for Facebook in a
different way. Either way, we’re complicit. Enabling. I think it’s best to stay
as neutral as possible. Or at the very least let a different part of Facebook
handle it. Not the part of Facebook that is responsible for all policy and
content decisions. But I lose every fight. Nobody’s listening to me.

23
Making Sure This Thing Flies
By April 2015, Internet.org is stalled. Mark’s said he’ll do whatever it takes
to make it a success, and invests inordinate amounts of his own time. But
only nine countries have rolled out the app since it launched nine months
ago.
I pitch him attending the Summit of the Americas in Panama, where he
can meet lots of heads of state and prime ministers in one place. And to
supercharge Mark’s time at the summit (and elevate him above the other
CEOs who’ll be there), I’ve negotiated to have him participate in a panel,
alongside President Obama and the presidents of Mexico, Panama, and
Brazil (our target countries!). It’s been a torturous process to get agreement
to have Mark onstage with presidents, but the Panamanians have been
helpful accomplices. That is until the White House heard what I’d done.
They’re furious for reasons I never uncovered, but I think they don’t like
the power dynamics of Mark onstage with Obama and other presidents. As
a result, Mark’s ousted from the panel, but they put him in the front row of
the audience with the president of Coca-Cola and some other CEOs, and at
one point, Obama points to Mark sitting there and says, “I’m glad that my
friend, Mark Zuckerberg, is here. Obviously, what he’s done with Facebook
has been transformative.”
Mark is handed a mic to ask a question. He takes the opportunity to
promote Internet.org and ends by asking each of the presidents on the panel,
“What more can we be doing together to connect everyone in the world?”
See what we did there? Mark’s momentarily leading them in discussion.

The Mexican president responds, “Digital inclusion is the new
alphabet.” President Obama adds that “governments need to work with the
private sector.” He then goes on to give an unexpected example suggesting
that in Central America young people, instead of joining gangs, can start
internet companies using social media.
Mark’s thrilled. He’s got presidents lining up to reinforce the
importance of connectivity. As the session concludes, Mark and I try to
leave our front-row seats but we’re sucked into a vortex of people. They’re
thrusting business cards, calling his name, requesting selfies, and trying to
move me out of the way to get to him. I need to hustle Mark out of there to
his next meeting. But we can’t make any headway through the crowd. Any
direction we go, another person appears and I feel us being pushed back
into our seats. It’s a relief when Mark’s security team materializes and
pushes people back so we can walk toward the backstage exit. Except we’re
still not making progress and the circle of people around us starts pushing
against Mark’s security. His bodyguard senses the danger and starts to
forcefully move people out of the way. There’s discontent among the crowd
as it becomes clear that Mark is leaving the venue, not doing selfies. As his
bodyguard forcefully shoves a group of men to the side, a plaintive voice
cuts through:
“But, but, but … I’m the president of Guatemala.”
The people around us fall silent at the cri de coeur and stop jostling—
waiting to see how this will unfold. Mark looks at me like, What’s the
diplomatic protocol after you’ve shoved the president of Guatemala? And
before I can say anything, I see the smile playing on his lips. That’s
definitely not the diplomatic response, and everyone else sees it too. We
stand there for what seems like an unreasonably long time before security
hustles us out. For years afterward, anytime there are too many people
getting into a van or a room is too crowded, there’s always someone on the
team who’ll pipe up with plaintive indignation, “But, but, but … I’m the
president of Guatemala.”

The hubbub around Mark at the summit continues. The president of Panama
stands in front of the press with Mark to announce Internet .org’s entry into
Panama, and other heads of state are reaching out to ask for Internet.org in
their countries. Everyone’s talking about the importance of connectivity.
Telecom operators who’d refused to engage with us in the past now want to
host Internet.org. It’s like Internet.org has become the new cool thing no
one wants to be left out of, among these national leaders. It’s a very
different conversation from what we were having before the summit and
way better than we’d dreamed. Thirty new partnerships for Internet.org are
put in play during the summit. Mark and Javi generously give me the credit
for this and report back to Sheryl that I’m a “policy badass.” They’re so
impressed with my ability to pull strings around the world that when a
massive container ship emblazoned with the words NEW ZEALAND appears in
front of us during our tour of the Panama Canal, they’re sure I had
something to do with it.
We have other adventures in Panama. Drinks at a spectacular rooftop
bar. An unexpectedly fun, drunken dinner in a historic building where Javi
mistakes the word “delicacy” for “delicatessen” and Mark has to patiently
explain that delicious food is not described as a “delicatessen.” This is the
trip where we go to the state dinner with the scantily clad people at the
archeological site. Mark messages me to thank me—which is completely
uncharacteristic; he doesn’t usually thank his own staff—for making the
road trip productive “and also fun,” with a smiley emoji. It occurs to me,
when does Mark ever get to have much fun?
In the midst of all this positivity and goofing around, a few strange
things happen that I register as odd and potentially troubling. The first is
Mexico. We thought we had convinced the Mexican president to launch
Internet.org after our meeting last year but, like so many of the Internet.org
launches, it has stalled out. Even more worrying is the president of Brazil.
We learn that she has serious concerns about Internet.org that we need to
address. In fact, the meeting with her becomes the most important of the
summit, because Brazil is our biggest target in this hemisphere. It’s the
largest nation in Latin America and half its population is still offline, which
makes it critical for Facebook and for Internet.org.

Brazil is also at the forefront of internet regulation globally. It’s one of
the few countries that was quick to grasp the risks of social media and
swiftly move to regulation. Instead of accepting Facebook’s line that the
government doesn’t have authority over us, they’ve passed internet
regulation that’s comprehensive and has teeth, far ahead of any other
country. It gives them explicit jurisdiction over Big Tech on everything
from tax to privacy. They back it up with enforcement. When their courts
declare they will block our service, we believe them, because they do.
To top it all off, Brazil’s president Dilma Rousseff is someone other
leaders in the region listen to and respect. If she turns against Internet.org
publicly, it could kill the whole thing. The Brazilian press is reporting that
she’s going to make her decision soon—either to partner with Facebook on
Internet.org or to “protect” internet users in Brazil by keeping it out. We’ve
heard that activists are set to protest if she picks us. And despite all our
efforts, we still don’t know which way she’s leaning.
It was difficult to get any time on Rousseff’s schedule for an
appointment, but I wrangle an hour at 4:00 P.M. on Friday, the last day of the
summit.
And then … an impromptu meeting with President Obama is added to
the schedule, to start at 3:45. Which is exactly when we’re supposed to be
driving to President Rousseff. I find out about this minutes before it
happens. Someone from the White House must’ve offered it, and I’m sure if
anyone on our team asked Mark, he’d have said yes.
Mark had originally wanted Obama to come with us on our side trip to
the Panama Canal. Andrea messaged me and Joel, “Any chance that he
would visit the canal with us? POTUS I mean? That could be epic  …
leaders, standing in the middle of physical connectivity and innovation.” As
if I somehow have the ability to swing a cameo from President Obama
whenever Mark might want it. Joel politely pointed out that since Mark is
suggesting this less than a week before the summit, he’d be very surprised
if Obama’s schedule would allow for a road trip to the Panama Canal.
Instead, this impromptu presidential meeting happens in a secure area of
the convention center where they’re holding the summit. I deliver Mark into
the room before Obama gets there, hoping he’ll say “stick around” like he

does so often. Not this time. I wait in the corridor. When Obama arrives, he
leaves his people outside also.
I wait. We should be in our van right now, I think.
Soon it’s 4:00. Our meeting with President Rousseff is supposed to be
starting. I get a message from the Brazilians that their president is waiting
and wants to know where Mark is. It’s excruciating.
I message Derick—Mark’s communications guy—who’s closer to the
room, chatting with some Secret Service guys: “Please get him out asap.”
He responds, “They are behind closed doors.”
I obviously know that they are behind closed doors. I’m standing less
than ten feet away from Derick. I just don’t want to be the person who
interrupts this meeting.
“Knock on the door,” I message.
He ignores my message. I march over to where Derick is standing
beside a scrum of security guys and pull him away, saying, “You have to go
in there and get him out.”
“I can’t do that. He’s with the president of the United States. There’s a
Secret Service agent right here blocking the door. I’m not going to interrupt
them. You do it.”
“Derick, I’m not fighting with you. He simply can’t keep the president
of Brazil waiting any longer. It’s a disaster.”
“Good. I’ll watch you do it.”
I move toward the door where Mark’s bodyguard Brooks Scott is
standing watch, next to a Secret Service agent.
“You need to go into that room and get Mark out,” I urge Brooks. “I
don’t have time to get into it but for protocol reasons it is critical you
retrieve Mark now.”
I’m obviously trying to make this sound as official as possible, but he
doesn’t buy it. He knows he doesn’t take orders from me. We’re all in a
standoff, looking from one to the other—me, Derick, Brooks—when I hear
the unmistakable noise of a door handle being pulled down. I don’t even
know if it was my hand that did it. The door swings open and Brooks enters
the room so quickly I barely see him move. That’s instinct and training; if

someone can get to Mark, he has to get there first. I follow him. I look back
and see Derick standing in the door frame.
I imagine both President Obama and Mark are surprised and unused to
this sort of interruption, but honestly, my mind goes blank today when I try
to conjure the exact moment. I remember them sitting toward the back of
the room at a table covered by a white tablecloth with blue detail. Obama
perched at one corner of the table and Mark close beside. Plain chairs. Both
completely relaxed and somehow unsurprised to see me. I don’t hear what
they’re saying, just the pounding of blood in my ears. I walk over and say
something—I don’t remember what—along the lines of “We gotta go.”
Mark has no sense of urgency about the president he has waiting. He
continues to shoot the shit and loiter with this one for a little bit longer. I do
remember it’s agonizing, watching him slowly summon himself to go.
Finally I get him out of there and rally the rest of the team to get out of the
conference hall as quickly as possible.
Of course we’re late to meet President Rousseff, but she’s gracious about it.
Treats it like no big deal. This is a woman who’d been tortured by a military
dictatorship, she’d been a guerrilla leader, so I frankly didn’t expect her to
be the kind of person who’d engage in a lot of chitchat. But she talks to us
with warmth, asking with genuine interest about our trip to the Panama
Canal (without Obama). When Mark presents her with a Facebook hoodie
with a Brazilian flag sewn on, she seems genuinely tickled and puts it on
right away.
“I came here to Panama just to meet you,” Mark says, which is
awkward, given how long we’ve kept her waiting while he hung with
Obama. She doesn’t bat an eye. He presses on. “Brazil is so important as a
leader for the internet and is so influential. Facebook can help you achieve
your goals to bring the benefits of the internet to all the Brazilian people.
Our program is called Internet.org.”
Unsurprisingly, she already knows the name, and as they get into the
substance, Rousseff transitions from charm to a steely grasp of the technical
aspects of internet regulation. A trained economist, she asks pointed

questions that Mark has a hard time answering about zero rating—where
services like Internet.org get subsidized by telecoms, which underpins the
whole project. She deflects Mark’s efforts to get her to endorse or partner
with us to launch the Internet.org app and instead asks for real ways to
provide free internet in Brazil. She wants infrastructure. She wants
investment. She wants drones deploying the internet to remote parts of the
Amazon.
And she’s right. Facebook could have offered these things. Facebook is
investing in internet drones and is currently building a prototype. But when
we message the team to see if we can agree to testing the drones in Brazil,
they tell us no: “Right now we need to stay focused on making sure this
thing flies.” I think they already suspect the drones are not going to happen.
Mark starts to get desperate. “I think we could get there quickly by
launching the Internet.org app instead this quarter. My schedule is tight but
I will come to Brazil in June to launch with you.” He offers e-government
services and local content. “I have a team ready to make that happen.”
President Rousseff is inscrutable. She warmly welcomes Mark’s offer to
travel to Brazil and says some positive things about the Internet.org app but
doesn’t commit to anything. And before we know it her team are insisting
she has to leave.
Days later she tells the press that she and Mark limited their
conversation to Facebook building internet infrastructure in Brazil and
didn’t discuss Internet.org or zero rating. Not true at all, but at least she’s
giving a clear signal where Internet.org stands with her. She says that Mark
will come to Brazil in June to negotiate a partnership but that “we have to
think in our interests.”
I share this with the Facebook team. Joel responds, “Oh man. Cold feet
already. The battle is joined and we need to start fighting back.”

24
California Time
One of the unexpectedly stressful things about traveling with Mark is the
repeated questions about why I’m not based in California, closer to him and
the teams. These are friendly, teasing, but I know he’s serious about this.
Three weeks after Panama, I’m back with Mark and our friend,
Japanese prime minister Abe, at Facebook’s Menlo Park headquarters.
Abe’s made good on his promise to visit us, dropping by after his state visit
with Obama. He’s now one of many heads of state who want to stop by
Facebook’s HQ.
“This is success,” I explain to Mark as we discuss the Abe meeting.
“Facebook and meeting with you is becoming a standard thing for heads of
state to do, when they visit the president. Like a West Coast White House.”
“You’re going to be out here all the time, then,” he says. Mark’s not
someone who jokes, but this is his version of an amused poke at me.
“I already am,” I respond.
“Then save yourself the trouble and just make it permanent. I don’t see
what’s so great about New York.…”
“Then you don’t know New York.…”
“I grew up there.”
“New York City, not the suburbs, Mark.”
“What would you know? You’re from New Zealand.”
I don’t take the bait and we move on. No one from the policy team is
based in California. They all see the world’s center of power as Washington,
DC. And Mark hasn’t asked anyone from the team to move to California, so

I figure it will all blow over. But part of me worries that Mark has
understood what I see, that power is shifting and Silicon Valley is starting to
assert itself on its own terms. A place political power players have to visit.
A few weeks later, completely out of nowhere, I receive this message:
From: Mark Zuckerberg
Sent: Friday, May 29, 2015, 5:54 P.M.
To: Sarah Wynn-Williams
Subject: Thank you
Sarah,
Thanks for all that you are doing around the world to build important relationships for
Internet.org.
You’ve set up many critical meetings with Heads of State, which is pretty much impossible to
do. You created a rally in Indonesia, got the meet and greet with Kirchner [the president of
Argentina] and you’ve worked hard to keep things moving forward despite our challenges.
I’m really optimistic that we’ll achieve our goals, and you work [sic] is a really important part
of connecting the world.
Mark
Every fiber of my being wants to stay in New York with the life we’ve built
there, but when I read this I know we have to move to California. It may not
look like much. An encouraging email from a boss. But like I said, Mark
doesn’t send these. He thinks that if you work directly with him regularly
you should know you’re good at your job. You don’t need affirmation. And
combined with the drumbeat of comments about moving, I assume this
email is his way of saying it’s time to relocate. And he’s choosing to flatter
me into it, rather than force me. But he’s capable of either.
Weeks later when I’ve sorted the logistics and let him know I’m
relocating, he sends the sort of gracious email that would be normal from
another sort of boss but surprises me from him.
From: Mark Zuckerberg
Sent: Thursday, July 02, 2015, 1:39 A.M.
To: Sarah Wynn-Williams
Subject: MPK [Menlo Park]

I’m glad you’re moving to MPK and I’m looking forward to working together more closely.
Thanks again for everything you’re doing. We’re going to have a big impact all over the
world.
Mark
Note the timestamp. Typical.

25
Muppets and Monsignors
September 2015 ends with a big week for Mark on the two projects most
important to him: China and Internet.org. He also gives the keynote speech
at Oculus Connect, the conference we’ve organized to promote Facebook’s
investments in virtual reality. Each of these disparate threads represents a
different vision for Facebook’s future. If any one of them comes through,
we’ll be a very different company.
First up during that week is Chinese president Xi Jinping.
I was confused months earlier when Vaughan and the China
cheerleaders inside Facebook announced that President Xi would begin his
state visit to the US at Facebook’s headquarters, to announce our entry into
China. A Facebook page that Vaughan and the China team helped establish
just for the visit, #XiVISITUSA, had somehow amassed over five million
followers. I found that odd. More people are into this visit than the entire
population of my country? Who are they? Facebook isn’t even available in
China. What exactly had been done to the algorithm to boost the audience?
Will we be offering this incredibly valuable service to other heads of state?
Don’t we need to be honest about it?
The team apparently put a lot of effort into protecting the page. Something
other heads of state, like the Mexican president hit by the poop emoji storm,
would have loved. And the team worked toward offering VIP service for
other Chinese Communist Party pages.

Then, in mid-August, we hear from Condoleezza Rice’s consulting firm
—which we’ve hired to help with China—that the Chinese president will
not be visiting Silicon Valley on his visit. This is news to Vaughan and the
rest of Facebook. Joel responds in an email, “If accurate, seems like a
strong signal they aren’t on a late September timetable” to announce our
entry into China. Debbie forwards me his email with this comment:
“Exactly what you said.” She’s another China skeptic.
Xi chooses Seattle, the home of Amazon and Microsoft, to start his visit.
Ouch.
Vaughan keeps hopes alive of a meeting between Mark and Xi in
Seattle, suggesting it will be the time and place where Facebook’s entry into
China is announced. Then this is scaled back to a “pull-aside” at a group
meeting and no announcement, and finally a “longer than normal
handshake,” which Mark is prepared to fly to Seattle for. They’re desperate.
The handshake does happen, but in a particularly galling setting: the
Microsoft campus, during Xi’s tour of the facilities. I’m not with them, but
watching the video, it’s hard to tell if it’s “longer than normal.” They’re
together for less than a minute. In contrast, Xi holds a closed-door meeting
with thirty American and Chinese CEOs, including Jeff Bezos and Tim
Cook. Mark is not invited.
Having invested so much to get this handshake, Mark posts a photo of it
on his Facebook page, making it sound like he actually was allowed to
attend the meeting with the other CEOs:
Today I met President Xi Jinping of China at the 8th annual US-
China Internet Industry Forum in Seattle. The Forum is an
opportunity for CEOs of technology companies to meet with
government officials from the US and China to discuss common
issues for the future of our industry.
He adds at the end:
On a personal note, this was the first time I’ve ever spoken with a
world leader entirely in a foreign language. I consider that a
meaningful personal milestone.

But there’s a problem with the photo he posts. It’s from an angle where
you see Mark’s face, and the back of President Xi’s head. This is a breach
of protocol. I’m not there because I try to avoid all things China. But the
moment I see it, I know there’s going to be trouble, and sure enough, panic
ensues at forty thousand feet on Mark’s private jet when the Chinese
government contacts them over the spotty internet connection to let him
know they’re furious about it. Instead of creating a positive first impression
with the president of China, they’ve created a diplomatic crisis. We’re
banned from China, barred from the meetings with the other tech CEOs,
confined to a one-minute handshake, and even that, they’ve screwed up.
Next come agonizing discussions about whether to leave the photo up.
But every person on that jet has been on the receiving end of requests to
remove embarrassing things from Facebook, and they’re all acutely aware
that taking something down can attract way more attention and controversy
than simply leaving it up. They continue debating the entire flight, and as
they land the realization hits that the photo is already everywhere across the
internet. The damage is done. They leave it up.
Two days later, at a state dinner in the White House, Mark gets another
chance to speak with Xi. In Mandarin, he asks Xi if he’ll do him the honor
of naming his unborn child. Xi refuses.
The next day, Saturday, September 26, Mark addresses the United
Nations, hoping to rouse excitement for Internet.org. As always, I try to get
him the most high-profile speaking slot possible. At the UN that means the
morning. The earlier you are, the more important you are. I manage to book
him between the president of Argentina and the prime minister of the UK,
and then Mark’s assistant Andrea nixes it. The United Nations isn’t
important enough for Mark to do an event before noon. He still doesn’t like
getting out of bed early. We compromise with a later slot. The day before
the event at the UN, when Elliot sees which presidents are scheduled to
speak before and after Mark, he suggests pulling out. This is before tech
companies were engaging with the UN, and I find no one on my side in
wanting Mark to speak there. The whole thing is being treated as if Mark
was indulging me by agreeing to do it in the first place, like he was visiting
my hometown as a favor or something. “These heads of state are not

particularly impressive, no?” Elliot writes. I feel myself bristle, as a citizen
of one of those “not particularly impressive” nations. In the end, he decides
that a photo of Mark addressing the UN will be worth the indignity, and we
don’t cancel.
We’re going to the UN because we’re trying to influence their
Sustainable Development Goals. They update these every fifteen years.
They’re targets to do things like reduce global poverty and illiteracy and
inequality, and promote gender equality. Back when I first started at
Facebook, Marne and I tried to get the United Nations to add internet access
(or any reference to the internet) to the UN’s seventeen development goals.
At first, we were literally laughed at — “You mean you’re here from some
internet site to tell me that giving people the internet is more important than
ending child mortality? Or eradicating hunger?” But now the draft goals for
2015 include a few references to connectivity. Internet access is definitely
not a UN priority. But at least they’re acknowledging it.
To push them further in this direction, I pitch a “Connectivity
Declaration.” It’s a petition anyone can sign online, stating that “internet
access is essential for achieving humanity’s #globalgoals” and pointing out
that “half the people on this planet don’t have access, especially women and
girls.” It calls on “leaders and innovators from all countries, industries and
communities to work together as one to make universal internet access a
reality by 2020.”
In my mind, we’re not just doing this because it’ll create more
Facebook users and promote Internet.org. It really seems like a tangible
way we can use our power to make the world a better place. In retrospect,
staggeringly naive.
Facebook spends over $1 million on full-page advertisements
championing the Connectivity Declaration in the New York Times, the Wall
Street Journal, and other publications around the world, and I’m astonished
how many people take it seriously and sign up. We get a bizarre bedfellows
party of celebrity endorsements from Shakira, Stephen Hawking, George
Takei, Bill Gates, and Charlize Theron. Real NGOs like the United Nations
Foundation sign on. We partner with Bono’s ONE Foundation, because
Bono is a friend of Sheryl’s, and write an op-ed for Bono and Mark to place

in the New York Times setting out our connectivity agenda in more detail.
Everyone’s surprised when Bono wants to edit it.
We spend millions more building a giant “innovation pop-up” in the
plaza right in front of the UN, a big glass structure with screens depicting
the connected world and videos of people who’ve recently gotten the
internet, along with an array of VR headsets, an Instagram wall, and the
extremely large wing of a drone prototype that we’re hoping will someday
deliver internet from the air.
Mark delivers his speech to the United Nations General Assembly and
gets generally glowing press for it. CNN’s website: “Mark Zuckerberg:
Internet Access Can Eradicate Extreme Poverty.” Reuters: “Facebook
Founder Calls for Universal Internet to Help Cure Global Ills.” Wired:
“Zuckerberg to the U.N.: The Internet Belongs to Everyone.” I’m thrilled
these things no one else wanted to do have all worked.
But then we have a lunch at the United Nations Private Sector Forum,
with Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and German chancellor Angela
Merkel. Mark’s nervous sitting next to Merkel, because Germany has
several open investigations into Facebook privacy issues dating back to
Marne’s Holocaust meeting with the German ministerial delegation, and has
been one of the most suspicious and effective regulators of the internet.
Before the speeches, Merkel is caught on a hot mic pressing Mark to
remove antirefugee posts from Facebook in Germany. She’s just opened her
borders to hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees, she’s under significant
political pressure, and the torrent of racist anti-immigrant posts is damaging
her popularity and making her job that much harder. Mark is heard on mic
agreeing, “We need to do some work” on this hate speech.
Then, when he gets onstage to deliver his keynote, it’s a surprise to
everyone including me when Mark announces that Facebook will be
“working with UNHCR [the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees] to bring the Internet to refugee camps.” I’ve never heard anyone
breathe a word about this at Facebook. Neither, apparently, has Elliot,
Facebook’s policy head, who sends out an email to the team asking, “Does
anyone know where the offer of wifi to refugee camps came from?”

No one does. Even the head of Internet.org, Chris Daniels, was
blindsided by this and writes, “We would appreciate a discussion on these
announcements before they are announced.”
Apparently Mark made this up.
Maybe he’d been planning to announce this for days, and for some
reason didn’t want to discuss it with all of us. But it also seems possible that
it was an ad lib, made up on the fly to quiet some inner discomfort after
Angela Merkel scolded Mark for worsening the refugee crisis. Maybe he
thinks everyone just freestyles at the United Nations.
At the luncheon, there’s no time to think through what Mark’s refugee
camp announcement means. We need to show Bono around our innovation
pop-up and then rush across Manhattan to Central Park.
Central Park is mobbed. It’s the annual Global Citizen Festival, and
sixty thousand people have shown up on the Great Lawn for a kind of
thinking man’s Davos music-and-ideas concert. The lineup includes
Beyoncé, Coldplay, and Stephen Colbert.
I think Mark will love this: crowds, celebrities, young idealistic
attendees. He’s talked about wanting to play a stadium. But I’m the only
one who wants him to do it. Elliot, Joel, Andrea—everyone else is
adamantly opposed. There’s too much happening this week with Xi’s visit,
the state dinner, and the United Nations. They want me to let it go. But I
know they haven’t asked Mark, and I’m convinced this satisfies something
he’s been wanting ever since his request for a riot, so I don’t let it go.
To make the timing work and get Mark a slot onstage after the UN
luncheon and the pop-up, I’d asked the festival organizers to move Big
Bird. They initially said no, insisting that my Big Bird problem created
issues for Malala and Beyoncé. Then they relented and moved Big Bird so
he’s right before Mark. Big Bird’s fine with this, but the Facebook team
does not think that this sets the right tone—Elliot doesn’t want Mark to
follow a giant yellow Muppet—so I need Big Bird moved again. I’m still
scrambling to solve that when Mark emails saying that the pope’s going to
be in New York that same day and, on top of everything else, he’d like an
audience with His Holiness.

I email a monsignor I’ve worked with in the past to ask about meeting
the pope, and ask Big Bird if he can swap with Bill Nye the Science Guy.
That would work for Mark, Malala, Beyoncé, and maybe the pope. But my
hopes are dashed when I’m informed that Big Bird can’t take the stage after
dark, and that Big Bird and his team are not prepared to do any more
accommodating for Mark Zuckerberg.
Andrea latches onto the idea that all our scheduling problems will be
solved if Mark simply provides a video for the Global Citizen Festival
rather than appearing in person. She proceeds to get the video filmed. I
continue to push for Mark to do it in person and beg her not to submit the
video, but the most I can secure is a promise that we’ll make a decision on
the day of the event. Which seems unnecessarily fraught to me. My position
is that Mark will definitely want to get in front of a huge crowd. Her
position is that it’s going to be chaos getting from one place to another in
New York during UN week. Meanwhile, the pope’s representative responds,
“Send Mark to Rome if he wants an audience with the Pope.”
I guess we’re all staking out our positions.
When we arrive at Central Park, we’re ushered into the penned-off area
for the performers. Common is laughing with Olivia Wilde in the corner
and Usher is casually taking photos of some of the beautiful women
lounging around. Leonardo DiCaprio is sharing our green room, talking to
Mark about some charity thing he wants Mark to support. But I can enjoy
none of this because I’m utterly exhausted. I’m three months pregnant with
my second child and have felt sick for every day of those three months. I’m
also worried I’m going to bump into Big Bird, who I hear is mightily pissed
at me about the whole schedule thing.
I excuse myself to get a front-row position for Mark’s speech and leave
Andrea and Mark in the green room.
As Bill Nye the Science Guy wraps up, having successfully switched
the slots, I watch the steps where Mark will take the stage. There seems to
be some sort of weird commotion between Andrea and the stagehand; she’s
arguing with him and he seems to be giving as good as he’s getting. I race
over, but before I get there I see Mark bouncing up the steps onto the stage
and surveying the crowd of tens of thousands. They all seem weirdly

excited by the Science Guy or Mark. I can’t really tell. Perhaps both. Out of
the corner of my eye, I catch sight of Big Bird backstage and immediately
feel every muscle in my body tense.
Mark takes the microphone and seems to be looking for the
teleprompter, and maybe that makes him miss a beat or maybe the setting
sun is in his eyes, but just as he starts his speech there’s some weird
feedback. His words are repeating but they’re a little bit different. What is
happening? He stops talking and just stands there, frozen, but his voice
keeps going. I realize to my horror that somehow a giant projection of his
face is speaking. It’s the video Andrea submitted. It’s booming out and
Mark is now looking around desperately, like an animal in a trap. The
audience is confused. I want to throw up. I can’t look at him in case he
makes eye contact with me. I start to call every person I have ever
connected with at the festival to tell them to stop the tape. No one picks up.
What is a very short video feels like it grinds on for eternity. Mark
awkwardly looks at the crowd. They stare back at him. I wonder, just for a
moment, if Big Bird is behind this. The video ends and I wait for Mark to
crack a joke or say something to the audience. But no, he just quietly backs
down the stairs on the side of the stage while still facing the crowd. It
reminds me of the GIF of Homer Simpson backing away through a hedge.
“What happened????” I rush over to him and Andrea.
“We needed to do his face and change his shirt.…” I mentally kick
myself. I know about his sweating issue. Along with a change of T-shirt,
Andrea now carries these blotting papers with her everywhere and blots
Mark’s face when he sweats. “I told them to wait while he changed.”
“But they can’t wait,” I interrupt her. “They squeezed us in. They need
to set up the stage for Beyoncé and Malala.”
I’m not sure why but this guts me. Maybe because I’d pushed so hard to
make it happen. Maybe because I’m utterly exhausted and not quite in
control of my emotions, thanks to the pregnancy. I’m worried I might cry,
and I know that would not be professional or proportionate.
“Look, this is my fault, I should have stayed with you,” I say. Knowing
that I had, somewhat shamefully, left them alone by the stage to avoid Big
Bird.

“Sarah, Dre, look, this is my fault,” Mark says earnestly. He’s looking
deep into my eyes. “No, seriously, it’s my fault.”
“It isn’t,” I insist. “I should have been able to stop the video.…”
“Look, Sarah, if I was good at speaking or even improvising this
wouldn’t be a big deal. I would have said something. I would have engaged
the crowd. I need to work on this stuff. It’s me, not you. Really.”
If I was worried about crying before, I’m even more worried now that
I’ll cry at his kindness. He’s never tried to comfort me before. He’s
surprisingly … tender?
“You’ve done an amazing job, really. I would never have thought we
could do any of what we’ve achieved today. Focus on all the impact you’ve
had, Sarah.”
As we transfer from van, to helicopter, to private jet, Mark continues to
reassure me—it’s the most human he’s ever seemed—and by the time
someone cracks a Big Bird joke at my expense, I’m fine.
Monday morning Mark emails the team, wanting a Facebook post about
his United Nations announcement, his plan to bring Wi-Fi to refugee camps.
He suggests we use a photo he’s found of a grinning white engineer
surrounded by refugees in Tanzania.
I don’t want to be the only person pushing back against this terrible
idea, so I ask Dex Torricke-Barton to point out the white-savior problem to
Mark. He emails Mark, “Would not use this photo—optics problematic for
diversity (prosperous white guy saving the poor black kids).”
I respond as politely as I can manage on the bigger problem—Mark
announced an initiative at the United Nations that doesn’t seem to exist.
The way I put this is that it’s not the time to post, as we’re “right at the
beginning of this program with limited substance.” Everyone agrees not to
post for now.
Elliot meets with some of the Internet.org people to discuss how to
implement what Mark promised and get Wi-Fi into refugee camps. They
decide we shouldn’t be giving away Wi-Fi for free but should instead create
a “sustainable business model” where refugees will pay. Joel hears about

this, and he writes the group, “Apologies for the ignorant question, but do
the refugees in these camps have a source of income?”
This is when it really hits me. There’s not going to be any meaningful
Wi-Fi delivered to refugee camps by Facebook, like Mark has announced at
the UN. When we left New York I’d never felt more connected to Mark,
and now I feel stupid. The United Nations still means something to me.
Despite its flaws. I’m the one who suggested he go there to lay out his
vision for making the world a better place, and it feels weirdly personal that
he’d be so cavalier or cynical to make this announcement there without it
being ready to roll out. In fact, he has not even discussed it with his team
before he speaks. Like, what kind of person does this—promises to help
people most in need without a plan in place or having discussed if it will be
possible?
At this point I’m still a true believer in Facebook’s mission to change
the world. And I had thought my role in it—my contribution—would be to
get Mark to engage internationally, meet with real heads of state. I thought
that would teach him to exercise political power responsibly. Make
reasonable compromises when needed, on privacy, protecting children, and
whatever mattered. Build a company that would make money, sure, but also
be a good citizen of the world.
But now it occurs to me that maybe Mark isn’t on the same page at all.
Somehow, introducing him to global leaders and putting him on the world
stage at the United Nations is having the opposite effect of what I’d hoped.
He seems to be giving less of a damn. Saying things because they sound
good. Posting things because they look good. Looking back now, I regret
having enabled this.
It gives me a bad feeling in the pit of my stomach.
What unfolds next with Internet.org only makes the feeling worse.

26
The Wicked Witch of the West
Sixty-seven digital rights groups around the world have joined forces to
oppose Internet.org. They summarize their objections in an open letter to
Mark Zuckerberg. For starters, they point out—correctly—that Internet.org
doesn’t actually deliver the full internet. Instead, users get access to a
handful of apps and websites that have been approved by Facebook and
local service providers. This violates basic principles of net neutrality, the
idea that everyone should have equal access to all the information and
services on the internet, and the ability to create content and innovate
without asking anyone for permission. Reducing the internet to a few
stripped-down apps also makes it that much easier for any government to
control and censor the information reaching its citizens.
There’s a hastily organized videoconference between Chris Daniels,
who runs Internet.org, and digital rights representatives. It doesn’t go well,
full of accusations, anger, and vitriol on both sides.
The problems identified by the digital rights groups are so cartoonishly
awful that I initially assume they have it wrong. But I discover they are
right. They point out that none of the websites on Internet.org—including
the stripped-down version of Facebook—have the basic kinds of security
and moderation we use everywhere else. So terrorism, hate speech, fraud,
spam, and sexual content all go unchecked. You could be organizing a
terrorist attack or inciting people to violence on Facebook. Internet.org
prohibits encryption that could protect users from government surveillance
or fraud or cyberattacks. There’s no two-factor security protecting people’s

data and identities. It pushes all these problems onto the people least able to
solve them.
In short, Internet.org entrenches the digital divide between the haves
and the have-nots, by delivering a crap version of the internet to two-thirds
of the world. The two-thirds least digitally literate and able to cope with it.
What Mark’s running, in the digital rights groups’ view, is a bait and switch.
He’s pretending in his lofty speeches that this is all about connectivity and
handing people the tools they need to better their lives, when in fact he’s
delivering nothing even close. The whole thing, in their view, is a power
play to sign up more people to Facebook.
When they lay this out, Chris feels personally attacked, outraged that
they’re questioning Facebook’s good intentions. The way he sees it,
Facebook choosing which websites can be accessed from Internet.org is just
like Apple’s App Store or the Google Play Store dictating what apps are
available there. We’re making an app and negotiating a deal so people can
get it for free—what’s so evil about that? By the end of the meeting he’s
red-faced and angry and telling the digital rights groups that “they’re trying
to dictate the content of Internet.org,” which is exactly what they’re
accusing Facebook of.
The meeting rooms in Facebook’s offices all have cutesy names (Guns
’n’ Rosegarden in DC, I’ll Be Bak Choy in Singapore), and our goal of
convincing human rights groups of Facebook’s good intentions is perhaps
not helped by the fact that the name of the meeting room, Wicked Witch of
the West, is displayed, without explanation, under Chris’s talking head for
the entire meeting. (I point this out to him afterward, and within days the
name of the meeting room has been changed.)
I leave the meeting convinced that we’re on the wrong side of this one. I
feel like Mark is wrapping himself in a cloak of moral superiority when he
pitches Internet.org, pretending it’s advancing human rights and solving the
digital divide, and what he’s delivering is so far from that. It’s ugly. This
isn’t Facebook as a force for good or Mark acting responsibly. I, perhaps
foolishly, write an email to the leaders of Internet.org arguing that we
shouldn’t pretend that we’re trying to save the world with Internet.org. Let’s
just admit we’re doing it to get more users. Elliot quickly shoots back:

I think any move away from “public good” will be frustrating for Mark, since he views
internet.org as both a growth [get more users] AND a brand [philanthropic/good for the world
branding].
At the very least, I argue, we should change the name. The digital rights
groups are right when they say the name is deceptive. That’s so much of
their problem with this project. Internet.org isn’t the internet, and “.org”
suggests that it’s a nonprofit enterprise, which it isn’t. Let’s be honest about
what this is and is not. Also: we’ll never get into one of our key countries—
Brazil—if we don’t change the name. Their Ministry of Justice has declared
the name is misleading and barred us from using it in Brazil.
I bring this up with Mark many times. He deflects, blames me for not
doing a better job managing the Brazilians, or tells me the name Internet.org
is his choice and he has good reasons for choosing it.
The tussle grinds on for weeks. I keep pushing and after weeks of
meetings, marketing research, PowerPoints, product road maps, and fights
with every layer of Internet.org leadership, we end up in a tense showdown
with all the Internet.org guys in Mark’s personal meeting room at
headquarters. Mark doesn’t disguise his anger at the situation and lack of
progress on Internet.org. He’s combative, and at times surly, rehearsing all
the arguments I’ve heard ad nauseum over the months we’ve been debating
this, but it feels personal because I’m the only one opposing him. I’m the
only one urging compromise with our opponents on this issue. And,
unsurprisingly, I’m the only woman in the room. I try to convince Mark that
by giving in on this point, we’ll score wins that are more important to us.
He can’t accept the need to concede on anything. He wants to win it all.
After railing against the name change for over twenty long minutes while
we sit in silence, he ultimately concedes to changing the name in Brazil
only. He suggests the name Free Apps (and freeapps.com).
The problem is that in Brazil the app isn’t free; users have a minimum
balance requirement and tax payment. It takes another month of arguing
before we arrive at our new name: Free Basics. That’ll be what Internet.org
is called, not just in Brazil but everywhere.

27
Street Fighter Tactics
The problems in Brazil are bad, but the problems in India are worse.
Facebook launched Internet.org in India in February 2015. At that time, of
the four billion people in the world who weren’t connected to the internet,
one billion lived in India (although that changed rapidly in years to come).
India was always a top priority for Internet.org. But after a promising start,
things quickly unraveled. The government’s Telecom Regulatory Authority
(TRAI) started to flex its significant power and announced it was going to
look into programs like Internet.org and get the public to weigh in on
whether they should be banned. Some of our Indian partners on Internet.org
—like Flipkart (India’s Amazon) and NDTV (India’s CNN)—knew this
meant we were probably doomed, and hurriedly pulled out of the app.
Sheryl tried to reassure the Facebook leadership:
Our policy team is directly engaged with the government, include
[sic] Prime Minister Modi’s office. We’re lucky this is happening in
a place where we have very deep senior relationships in the
government, but it’s still going to be hard. If we lose this in India it
will send all the wrong signals in Latin America.
Angry at losing on the name change to free basics, Mark keeps
instructing the team to “go on the offensive” against governments. No one
really understands what he means, but I have a sinking feeling that it’s not
going to be good.

On August 21, 2015, Mark assembles all the senior men working on
what’s now called Free Basics and me in his conference room named the
Aquarium. The guys are pretty tense and Mark addresses the group like a
general addressing his troops—one who is displeased with their
performance.
Mark opens the meeting by talking admiringly about what he calls
“street fighter tactics” that Uber is employing against politicians around the
world and how successful they’ve been. I’d thought there was a general
agreement that Facebook didn’t use these underhand tactics and we
certainly didn’t admire them.
Uber weaponizes their drivers and riders, creating strikes, protests, and
transportation chaos, forcing authorities to the table. They’re sponsoring the
soccer teams of the children of key Brazilian senators responsible for
decisions that impact their business, insisting on having UBER plastered
across their kids’ uniforms. They propose compiling opposition research on
journalists. It’s dirty. But what becomes clear the more Mark speaks is that
not only does he not judge what Uber is doing, he’s judging us for not doing
it. Mark believes Facebook could have a lot more leverage with politicians
than Uber ever could, and we’re failing him by not using these tactics.
He launches into a spiel about Emperor Augustus, his favorite emperor,
who led the transformation of Rome from a republic to an empire. He talks
about “offense.” He wants to mobilize Facebook users. He wants pro-
Facebook activists. He wants protests.
Then he talks “defense.” He wants lists of adversaries, whether they’re
companies, individuals, organizations, or governments. He wants to know
how we can use the platform and tools we have to win against these
adversaries. He doesn’t want us to constrain ourselves to our usual
Internet.org tools. He wants us to leverage all of Facebook to find the right
things to offer our enemies in order to pull them over to our side. He wants
us to invent ways to use the platform and the algorithm to pressure them.
He wants to establish a team within Facebook to figure out how to build the
tools that will use the algorithm and platform to pressure adversaries,
including politicians who oppose us, to bolster the policy team.

I try to catch Joel’s eye to see if he’s also shocked by what he’s hearing.
He won’t look at me. He looks chastened, not surprised. As if he’s heard all
this before.
“When you say ‘adversary,’ who do you mean?” I raise my hand and
ask tentatively, a little concerned about what will happen to anyone on one
of these lists.
“Anyone who opposes us is an adversary,” Mark responds firmly. Not
acknowledging that when it comes to Free Basics, that’s basically everyone.
All I can think is how horrified politicians would be if they knew Facebook
was harnessing the platform and its power to put the screws to their thumbs.
He’s angered nearly every human rights group we work with, they’re
now on the list of adversaries, and he’s about to torch all the trust we’ve
spent years building with politicians and leaders around the world. And he
doesn’t care. In fact, he’s doubling down and compiling an enemies list,
going after anyone who raises reasonable concerns about Internet.org. After
years at the company, I’d never seen him go on the offense like this, with
such ferocity and hostility. There’s no idealism there at all, not about
Facebook or Free Basics or anything. This isn’t the revolution I signed up
for. This isn’t who I thought Mark would become, when I first tried to coax
him into international politics. I don’t want to be part of any of that. But I’m
pregnant and showing and it’s no time to start looking for a job. So I make a
decision. Up till now, I’ve done everything I could to help Facebook grow.
But now is a turning point. For the first time since I pitched this job to
Facebook, I won’t exhaust everything I have to deliver what my bosses
want. I won’t do all I can to develop creative strategies to advocate and
convince governments and civil society that they’re wrong because I don’t
think they are. Instead, I’ll focus my efforts on Facebook’s leadership, keep
raising objections in meetings and emails at Facebook. I’ll execute Mark’s
orders halfheartedly—focusing on the ones I agree with and not putting
particular effort into the others. I’ll no longer try to do the impossible to
make things happen for Facebook. When civil society groups and the
Brazilian government point out problems with Free Basics, I won’t try to
buy them off with “thoughtful partnerships.” I will keep bringing their
issues—that there’s no encryption, no privacy policy, and no moderation of

content on Free Basics—to the teams responsible for them at Facebook,
knowing they probably won’t fix them. And they don’t.
This feels so weird to me. I know how much Mark wants Internet.org
and believes in it. But I tell myself I joined Facebook because I believed the
platform was a force for good that would change the world. I didn’t join for
Mark.
It doesn’t take long for an actual “war room” to be established. But just for
India, because I refuse to do it for Brazil.
Soon they’re cranking out advertising campaigns across TV,
newspapers, cinemas, radio, and billboards in India. Spending tens of
millions of dollars, not including the dark-post (targeted nonpublic posts for
specific users that only they would see) advertising on Facebook itself,
which is aiming to reach over 50 percent of adult users in India. There are
separate SMS campaigns. Their strategy—laid out in an “India Action
Plan”—calls for them to “galvanize actual (or at least the appearance of)
public support,” the italics give the game away somewhat here. So there are
op-eds. User stories. They organize protests—or riots, as some in the
marketing team joke—in support of Free Basics. When I ask that team how
they managed to get people there, why on earth Indians would feel so
strongly about a poorly designed Facebook product with many flaws that
they would march in the streets for Internet.org, one of them tells me it was
by promising free T-shirts. I don’t know if he’s joking. They activate the
megaphone that Mark wouldn’t let Sheryl use for organ donation. It warns,
“Free Basic Services are at risk in India,” and tells users to show their
support by liking the page. Mark writes to Prime Minister Modi trying to
arrange a meeting. Sheryl calls the minister in charge of the internet; Joel
and the India team organize outreach to other politicians. There’s lots of
travel back and forth to India.
The Indian regulator, TRAI, has a new chairman and in mid-November he
announces that he wants to make a quick decision after the agency has

dithered for nearly a year. For the second time, the regulator asks the public
to comment on four questions concerning net neutrality and zero rating,
which together will determine whether Free Basics lives or dies.
We have six weeks. Mark had told the team to leverage every tool
Facebook has, so all Indian Facebook users now see a pop-up when they
log in:
Unless you take action now, India could lose free access to basic
internet. Tell the TRAI you support Free Basics and digital equality
in India. A small, vocal group of critics are lobbying to have Free
Basics shut down on the basis of net neutrality. Instead of giving
people access to some basic internet services for free, they demand
that people pay equally to receive access to all internet services—
even if that means 1 billion people receive no services because
access costs too much.
The megaphone has a large purple button prompting all Indian
Facebook users to email the regulator. Clicking on this sends a form letter
supporting Free Basics into the official “public consultation.”
To create virality, the team designed it so that clicking on this would
also notify a user’s friend list that they had submitted a letter to the
regulator. As if this were not intrusive enough, many users complain that
even if they declined to send the message, merely lingering on the page
caused Facebook to send all their friends a notification saying they had
written to the regulator. This feat of engineering resulted in nearly 17
million submissions to TRAI by January 7, 2016. Well, 16,987,204 emails
to be precise.
So there’s shock and panic on Sunday, January 10, when TRAI
announces that it’s received only 1.4 million submissions.
“So the reported numbers are off by a factor of 10?” Joel queries.
The guy responsible for the campaign tells him yes. “We were
monitoring logs on this and as far as I know 16.9M emails were all actually
delivered.”
This prompts further digging. Then a discovery. It looks like something
stopped the emails from actually being sent out. Some sort of technical

glitch. They’re trying to figure out what happened but it’s a complex
system.
The period to comment has ended and the team agrees there’s no way
TRAI will accept more comments after the deadline. The atmosphere at
Facebook’s headquarters is funereal. Everyone’s like, “Someone’s gonna
get fired. Don’t know who it’ll be. But someone’s gonna get fired.” Leaders
leave crisis meetings to “comfort their teams.” There are bouts of collective
disbelief. How, after spending tens of millions of dollars, the war room, the
advertising campaigns, the daily crisis meetings, Mark’s many visits to
India, Modi’s visit to Facebook, how had Facebook stumbled right at the
finish line by messing up the technology to deliver these comments? We’re
a technology company.
A few days later, a breakthrough. The team figures out what happened.
Someone at TRAI—whoever controlled the email address for the public
comments—simply opted out of all emails from Facebook. This happened
back on Wednesday, December 16, between 9:00 and 10:00 P.M. PST.
There’s a record of it on Facebook’s logs. In the hour before they opted out,
over 200,000 emails were sent to them. In the hour after, it dropped to 251.
Mark and some of the brightest tech minds in the world devoted months
to this, and some low-ranking official in India outfoxed them simply by
clicking an opt-out box.
Elliot immediately flies to India to try to convince TRAI to take the 17
million submissions. He reports back to Mark and Sheryl, “This was a
contentious discussion with lots of anger and frustration by TRAI’s team—
they felt that we exploited our position as gatekeeper.” The regulator was
furious that Facebook’s viral submissions didn’t actually answer the four
questions the regulator had asked. Why should they accept them as actual
public comment? The TRAI felt like Facebook had reduced a democratic
public consultation to a popularity contest and abused its platform and
power. Nonetheless, Elliot convinces them to accept all 17 million
comments—which of course are all the same exact comments, 17 million
times over—on a flash drive. He returns to California confident that he’s
won this, and writes to Mark and Sheryl, “It’s difficult to believe that TRAI

will come out with a blanket prohibition of zero rating.” Free Basics will
survive in India.
A few weeks later, on February 8, 2016, the regulator published its
decision. Free Basics was banned. Completely struck down. A blanket
prohibition of zero rating. Effective immediately. Which feels like a special
“fuck you” because it means Facebook has to figure out how to shut it
down in a day. They could’ve given the team a small grace period to turn
the thing off.
In our meeting when we learn the news, Elliot looks defeated and
humbled in a way I’ve never seen him. It takes him weeks to shake it.
We’ve never lost a fight this big.
Internet.org has two other priority projects, and they both crash and
burn—literally—within months. In June, the Aquila prototype, a drone the
size of a jet airplane that is supposed to deliver Wi-Fi and stay in flight for a
year, smashes to earth during a test flight. A National Transportation Safety
Board review of the accident said it crashed because it was flying in
stronger winds than it was built to handle. The website the Verge showed
this report to an aviation expert who criticized the fact that Mark was there
for the maiden voyage, saying it put pressure on the engineers to fly despite
the high winds. “I never would have approved flying in those conditions—
and certainly not having the CEO coming in to witness it.”
Three months later, on September 1, Elon Musk’s SpaceX rocket
explodes on the launchpad, completely destroying the Internet.org satellite
it’s supposed to be putting in orbit. Mark posted,
As I’m here in Africa, I’m deeply disappointed to hear that
SpaceX’s launch failure destroyed our satellite that would have
provided connectivity to so many entrepreneurs and everyone else
across the continent. Fortunately, we have developed other
technologies like Aquila that will connect people as well.
Aquila, of course, was the drone that crashed on its maiden flight.

After this, Free Basics doesn’t die immediately. It launches in a few more
countries: Nigeria, Madagascar, Algeria, Belarus, and unfortunately
Myanmar. (That becomes a particular disaster that I’ll get to in a bit.) But
there are no more daily crisis meetings, no more war room. Mark and the
other senior leaders simply disappear from the effort and turn their attention
elsewhere.

28
Lean In and Lie Back
Sheryl’s absence from the Internet.org fiasco is not unusual. By this time
she’s absent from a lot. What’s more surprising is that it’s a twenty-six-
year-old who steps into her role.
Rather than appointing an experienced chief of staff, Sheryl hires a
number 
of 
young 
graduates 
who 
fulfill 
a 
hybrid
administrative/advisory/personal assistant role. These positions attract
ambitious graduates who want to be close to power. Part business, part
lady-in- waiting. Over time they begin to wield significant power
themselves, becoming more of a consigliere than an assistant.
Of these hires, Sadie is the gold standard. An Ivy League graduate,
good-looking, with a ruthless efficiency in building the perfect résumé. She
took a creative and apt shortcut to the job by working at Sheryl’s Lean In
Foundation. If anyone embodies leaning in, it’s Sadie.
I like working with her and we become friends. She’s smart, charming,
and way funnier than most of the self-serious superachievers we work with.
She thrives in the role, confiding with delight, “You would not believe the
things Sheryl’s delegated to me to decide.” We live in the same
neighborhood in San Francisco and commute to and from the office
together. Weirdly, Mark has his San Francisco house not too far from ours.
When I ask him why we never see him in the neighborhood, he explains it’s
because he can’t get planning permission for a place to park his helicopter
so he rarely uses the house. We might live in similar places, but we are
living completely different lives.

I’m delighted when Sadie announces she’s coming to Davos with Sheryl
in 
2016. 
I’m 
surprised 
when 
someone 
from 
Mark’s 
personal
communications team shows up midway through a Davos planning meeting
to discuss Sheryl’s social media strategy for the trip. I ask Sadie what he
does and she whispers that I do not want to know. I promise to leave it
alone if she lets me know the general area. She pauses and carefully
chooses her words.
“He manages engagement for Mark and Sheryl’s social media using all
of Facebook’s tools,” she says evenly. “You don’t want to know any more
than that.”
“Does this explain why they have millions of followers and ridiculous
amounts of engagement on their posts? Are they gaming the algorithm?”
“You don’t want to know,” she says.
The expectation to Lean In sits heavy, particularly now that I’m in the
final stages of pregnancy. The doctor wants to induce me at some point in
the next few weeks. I raise the possibility of skipping Davos, given the risk
of flying to Europe when I’m on the cusp of giving birth, and the response
from Sheryl’s office is being told I should make sure I have a doctor’s note
clearing me to fly, which is not the outcome I’m hoping for. Travel is taking
a toll more generally. When I explain this to Tom, he insists on coming to
my doctor’s appointment and once there explains I’ve been traveling and
working too much. He tries to convince my doctor not to write the note. He
fails. So, one more time, I try raising my concerns about traveling so late in
my pregnancy with my bosses. In response, I get an email from one of
Sheryl’s assistants:
The flight attendant assigned to the trip worked previously in the medical field and has credits
towards her nursing degree. The private jet operator also has MedAire and there are medical
kits on board.
I write back:
Thank you! I’m really hoping that none of this is necessary.…
Her response:
You and me, sister.

Not very reassuring.
This year everyone at Davos is focused on terrorism. This is just two
months after suicide bombers and gunmen killed 130 people in Paris,
including 90 at a concert in the Bataclan theater. Sheryl emails the
leadership team from Davos breathlessly highlighting how terrorism is
working to Facebook’s advantage: “Terrorism means the conversation on
privacy is ‘basically dead’ as policymakers are more concerned about
intelligence/security.” In other words, this is a moment when governments
are more interested in surveillance than people’s privacy. Which is good for
Facebook’s business.
A “good visit with the boys” is how Joel summarizes our meeting with
British prime minister David Cameron and George Osborne. Joel
emphasizes that he and Sheryl “made the case that we were doing a lot on
terrorism” and got a chance to rant about how Facebook’s competitors were
not, which Joel acknowledges is “admittedly a cheap shot but felt good.”
Joel’s pleased that both politicians try Oculus and that Osborne particularly
is impressed with Facebook’s drones, though Joel notes, “not as much as
Blair … Brits do seem to love a good unmanned aircraft.” But the point
when I realize that Facebook’s meetings with politicians are changing is
when I see that Cameron and Osborne don’t want to confront Joel and
Sheryl about any regulatory issues. What they want to talk about—and
ultimately request—is Facebook’s support against the Brexit vote.
They’re not alone. More and more politicians are explicitly requesting
that Facebook put its thumb on the scale. The causes range from reelection
to indigenous broadcasting content, but the expectation is clear. Some are
less delicate than others and accompany the request with a threat to regulate
if the request is refused. All the requests speak to the changing power
dynamic.
Once we’re airborne on the flight back from Davos, Sadie and I start to
churn through meeting notes, thank-yous, follow-ups, and a first draft of the

“lessons from Davos” email Sheryl will circulate to leadership. There’s a
separate room with a large bed in it, next to the main cabin, which is very
much Sheryl’s domain. Sheryl emerges from this room and announces that
she’s going to sleep and that we should all sleep now so we adjust to the
California time zone. Sadie and I exchange a look because we both know
that even if we work hard for the twelve hours it’ll take to get back to
California, it’ll be tough to complete all the work we have to do before we
land, and Tom and Sasha are not going to be happy if I arrive back from this
trip and then try to work throughout the weekend. We politely decline.
Sheryl seems miffed that we’re not taking her advice but returns to her
room, and we return to our work.
We’re an hour out of Zurich when Sheryl emerges back into the cabin in
her pajamas.
“What are you doing? I’m going to bed.” As if it isn’t obvious that
we’re preparing all the emails that’ll go out under her name.
“Lots to do,” I say cheerily.
“But it’s better if you rest now so you can get back on California time,”
she insists.
“I’m okay,” I respond. There is only one bed in the jet and Sheryl is
obviously using it.
“Sarah, come to bed.” Her tone hardens.
I look around at the others to check if they heard what I did.
I shake my head and she repeats her instruction. “Sarah, come to bed.”
We’re at a stalemate. I look around desperately for support from the
others but everyone’s looking away.
On the long drive from Davos to Zurich for the flight, Sheryl and Sadie
had taken turns sleeping in each other’s laps, occasionally stroking each
other’s hair, while I tried to make myself as small and invisible as possible,
feeling uncomfortable with what I was seeing. I hoped my enormous bump
made it clear that my lap was not available for my coworker or boss.
Regardless of motivation, it was not a position I felt I (or anyone else
working with Sheryl) should be put in. I make pleading eyes at Sadie
hoping she might be up for another close moment with Sheryl. Sadie shakes
her head.

Sheryl sees this silent exchange and snaps, “Sadie’s slept over lots of
times and I’m not asking Sadie. I’m asking you.”
I don’t want to do this for all the obvious reasons—it wouldn’t be right
for a male COO to ask for this and it’s not right for a female one to—but
one thing that popped into my head, I’ll confess, is that I’m scared of
something that happened on a flight a few weeks before this, from Tokyo to
San Francisco. So exhausted by work and pregnancy, I fell asleep before the
flight even took off, and woke up with a start. Everything around me was
white. I couldn’t get my eyes to focus and I couldn’t see a thing. Just white.
It reminded me of what I saw during my father’s leisurely drive to the
doctor after the shark attack when I really thought I wasn’t going to make it.
I go into a complete panic. Maybe I’d pushed myself to my limit and had a
medical emergency, maybe it was a pregnancy side effect, or maybe I was
having a breakdown. Maybe I shouldn’t be flying so heavily pregnant. I tear
at whatever my white confines are and as they fall and the interior of the
aircraft reappears, a flight attendant rushes over. In the most exquisitely
polite terms, she explains that I had been snoring so loudly that I was
disturbing other passengers, and the enterprising Japanese crew had erected
a small white tent around me to try to muffle the sound. I was mortified. I
tried to explain to her that I never normally snore, it’s only because I’m so
uncomfortably pregnant.
As Sheryl is insisting that I get into the bed with her, I’m worried about
many things, including that I’m so exhausted after working around the
clock for Davos that there’s a reasonable chance I would horrify Sheryl by
falling asleep and snoring at antisocial levels.
I look at Sadie for guidance. Her face is completely blank, as if she has
vacated her body. I’m on my own here. No; it is simply impossible for me
to get into bed with Sheryl. I’m resolute.
I tell her no, I can’t. But people say no to Sheryl so rarely, she doesn’t
know what to do with this. She retreats to her bed, making no effort to hide
her frustration and resentment.
I know something has broken between us. I know consequences will
follow, but I don’t know what they’ll be.

Sadie tries to console me, she tells me things will be fine, but there are
unspoken rules with Sheryl about obedience and closeness. Those closest to
Sheryl are rewarded. Marne and Sadie often appear in her unwanted
designer clothes; both assumed plum seats on boards that Sheryl had been
asked to serve on. There are courtside basketball tickets and introductions to
celebrities. Sheryl lends them the keys to her vacation homes.
Sadie is very conscious of the benefits of being Sheryl’s “little doll,” as
she calls it and having Sheryl tell her she loves her. She’s the one who
explained to me the benefits of “being on the pedestal.” She’s acutely aware
of others she shares that with. But she’s also very aware of the expectations
that come with it. How carefully calibrated the rewards and demands are.
Sheryl recently instructed Sadie to buy lingerie for both of them with no
budget, and Sadie obeyed, spending over $10,000 on lingerie for Sheryl and
$3,000 on herself.
When Sadie tries another of the bras Sheryl purchased her for the first
time, she emails her.
“This bra is INCREDIBLY beautiful and fits perfectly. So grateful. This
is my breasts equivalent of flying privately for the first time.”
“Happy to treat your breasts as they should be treated,” Sheryl responds.
Sadie confides she’s never spent this much on single items of underwear
in her life, messaging Sheryl that the experience is “a total Pretty Woman
moment (the good one not the one where they kick her out). I feel like the
fanciest twenty-six-year-old in the world.”
Sheryl responds by asking her twenty-six-year-old assistant to come to
her house to try on the underwear and have dinner. Later the invite becomes
one to stay over. Lean in and lie back.
At times Sadie shares with me how stressed out she is about her
relationship with Sheryl. I urge her to find a new job somewhere else,
where her life would be less enmeshed with Sheryl’s. She says she’s shared
her concerns with Elliot and another senior manager, and they’ve also
counseled her to escape from Sheryl.

When the plane lands in California, it’s pouring rain. We stand scattered
around the jet with Sheryl’s black car idling nearby and the rest of us
scanning the Uber app and juggling umbrellas while waiting for our
luggage to be returned by the overworked staff. Sheryl walks purposefully
toward me. I think she’ll make a conciliatory gesture or extend a thank-you
for what was a challenging but successful week at Davos. I raise my
umbrella politely and she leans in close.
“You should have got into bed.” Then she turns her back and stalks off
toward the waiting car. I just stand there, rain soaking into my hair and
running down my cheeks, my protruding belly collecting raindrops.
Oh, I think to myself. I’m probably going to have to leave this job.
Almost all policy at Facebook runs through Sheryl. If she writes me off, I
won’t be able to get anything done. Problem is, I really can’t quit right now.
I’m weeks away from giving birth. At this moment, it doesn’t seem like
much of a choice.
Alert to the new danger Sheryl poses, when she sends me an email
thanking me for my work at Davos on Monday and Joel echoes it, I decide
it’s best to tell him what happened in the plane. After I do, he simply
instructs me not to tell that story to anyone. So I tell his boss, Elliot, who
laughs nervously and then gives me essentially the same advice. I decide to
confide in Debbie, who is underwhelmed by my fears, telling me that “half
the department” has been in Sheryl’s bed by now. She is joking, like, hey,
this is less of a big deal than you think (and you’re less of a big deal than
you think—classic Debbie) and trying to reassure me. But it doesn’t help. I
start to notice Sheryl icing me out.

29
Citizen Sanchez
On some level my life was going “Americanly.” I was living “the American
dream,” bootstrapping from nothing to private jets with tech titans.
Although the reality of that dream was darker than I expected.
A few days after we arrive back from Davos, I report to the US
Citizenship and Immigration Services offices in a filthy part of San
Francisco. The place is run-down, with chipped paint and cheap carpet, the
staff carefully protected behind thick glass windowpanes. It feels like a
cross between the visitor’s room in a prison and an airport departure lounge,
with a list of case numbers on an electronic screen, enforced silence,
bureaucratic posters, and overtly heavy security presence.
For a variety of complicated reasons, I urgently need to secure
American citizenship. Facebook’s legal team have helped me with the
process, but now I need to ace the exams. While I genuinely enjoyed
learning about the aspirational foundational documents of the United States
of America, I’m worried about the civics portion of the test. Ten questions
that could be on anything from American history of the 1800s to American
holidays, constitutional rights, or national symbols. The practice questions
include things like, “What is one promise you make when you become an
American citizen?” the correct answer being to “give up loyalty to any
other country.”
I’ve told Joel I’m taking off the day for the test and that I’m worried
about getting the questions wrong. While I sit there, I get an email from
him. I’d responded to an administrative request from Joel’s assistant,

reminding her and Joel that I had taken time off for my Americanness test
but would respond as soon as that was done. Joel removes his assistant from
the email chain, replying:
Did you get the dirty sanchez question? I hear that is on the test like 10 percent of the time.
I don’t know what “dirty sanchez” means and I make the mistake of
googling it. I immediately regret doing that.
It’s not the first time he’s said something to make me uncomfortable. In
Panama when we rounded a corner too quickly and I accidentally bumped
into his hip, he said, “Don’t worry, you didn’t touch anything precious.”
After he approves a new position on my team, he emails me, “Who is your
sugar daddy?” (Which I guess is Republican policy wonk for “Who’s ya
sugar daddy?”) Another time he writes me saying, “I will personally buy
you ‘something nice’ (niceness TBD by the beholder/buyer) if you
responsibly spend” all your budget. As these things go, they’re all pretty
mild, but his dirty Sanchez question is a new low, totally inappropriate, and
I think, this is getting worse.
This all hits as I’m stewing in anxiety about the citizenship test,
desperately trying to memorize the foundational texts and the more perfect
union that US citizens strive for but sometimes fall short of. All the
aspirations they contain.
I get the first question wrong. It’s the date of our wedding. Trying to
start things off positively, the officer examining me allows me another
guess. Wrong again. Cautiously, he offers me a third opportunity to tell him
when my husband and I were married, and when I fail to guess correctly he
moves on.
The mood in the room has definitely darkened.
I manage to answer all the other questions correctly, and at the end the
officer seems genuinely happy for me. Nice guy. He leaves to print out
something to get me to the next step of this process, and then returns to the
room looking like someone has died.
“There’s a big problem,” he says. “When did you arrive in California?”

Turns out the State of California requires me to be a resident for ninety
days before I can become a citizen, and I’m seventeen days short. This is
something Facebook’s lawyers should’ve noticed. I should’ve just waited to
apply. Now I’ll have to start the entire process over again. We only have
five months before Tom’s visa runs out and he has to leave the country.
That’s way less time than the citizenship process usually takes, so
Facebook’s lawyers will have to apply for some sort of special rush petition
with Citizenship and Immigration Services. Whether we get to stay in
America depends on them.
Just one more reason I can’t quit my job right now.

30
Poker Face
It’s February 2016, and just weeks ago in Davos, leaders from around the
world were very explicit with Joel and Sheryl and me. They worried
terrorists were being radicalized on Facebook, hate speech was
proliferating, and Facebook was not partnering with them to figure out what
to do about it. They wanted to find new ways to tax Facebook. Internet.org
is basically dead at this point because it couldn’t get past governmental
scrutiny.
We’re in shit with governments all around the world.
Joel, Sheryl, and Elliot agree that things are bad enough that the board
needs to know. We need to get their attention and make them understand
that the threat of regulation is real; there will be pain and it’s coming soon.
Internet.org proved governments are one of the few things that can change
Facebook’s growth, products, and business overnight.
I’m still clinging to the ever-diminishing hope that we’ll drop the street
fighter tactics and start to engage in a much more open conversation with
governments about how social media should operate in their countries. In
other words, grow up. I know Joel and Sheryl and Elliot see this differently.
They’d play hardball way more than I care to (and maybe they’re right
about that in some cases). But even they see that something has to change.
Maybe Facebook’s board of directors can be the turning point and put us
back on the right path.
I’m authorized to write up a presentation for the board. We’ll make the
threat of regulation and its impact on the business real for them, and then

ask them for $55 million and sixty new staff members for the policy team
around the world.
The board meeting is held in a conference room at headquarters that we use
all the time. It looks out over the parking lot and scrubby marsh. A
decidedly unglamorous setting for some of the most powerful people in
Silicon Valley. It’s way more casual than I expected, almost disturbingly so.
I’d pictured it more like a Wall Street boardroom, or maybe the jury room in
Twelve Angry Men, people in suits earnestly and thoroughly sifting through
reports, spreadsheets, and data. Instead it’s more like a coffee break at a
college campus. Sheryl is perched cross-legged on her chair in yoga pants,
and Mark wanders the room in his standard jeans and T-shirt, occasionally
pausing to scroll through his phone. There’s no fear in the room. No
uncomfortable power dynamics. No tension. Probably because the structure
of the company gives Mark complete and utter control, dual class shares,
and a voting majority, making him basically untouchable. Mark and Sheryl
speak to the board the same way they speak to me. They’re the ones in
charge here.
Before they get to my item on the agenda, I watch them, fascinated by
the roles that each of the board members carves out. PayPal cofounder Peter
Thiel, who is more all-American clean-cut than I expected, plays the role of
provocateur. Former White House chief of staff Erskine Bowles takes a
scholarly approach, weighing his sparse words and interventions. Netflix
cofounder Reed Hastings is the sober businessman. Gates Foundation CEO
Sue Desmond-Hellmann—who looks like she just finished a hike—is like a
commonsense schoolteacher speaking up to get the discussion back on
track. Venture capitalist Marc Andreessen acts as if he found his way into
the room by accident and spends most of the meeting playing with his
phone. Physically bigger than anyone else, he has a boyish air that seems
out of context in a board meeting.
Joel, Elliot, and I don’t even stand to give our presentation. We lay out
our case that things are bad and about to get much worse, especially outside
America. Politicians and governments see a borderless internet as a threat.

Facebook is seen as competing against homegrown industries like
publishers, telecom operators, and local tech companies. And they’ll use
everything from antitrust regulation to privacy regulation to crush
Facebook.
Our goal is to frighten the board into dramatic action, but they don’t
seem very frightened. Their response is “deals.” What do these different
players want? Especially the decision makers, the regulators, and
politicians. And what can Facebook “offer them”? What will head off
regulation and change the global narrative on Facebook? This is very
different from the vision I had of our teams around the world constructively
working with governments and not trying to buy them off. We tell them,
basically, give us the money and the people and we’ll figure it out. They say
yes.
Then the board gets into a conversation about what other companies or
industries have navigated similar challenges, where they have to change a
narrative that says that they’re a danger to society, extracting large profits,
pushing all the negative externalities onto society and not giving back.
People suggest various analogues that don’t seem to fit very well and then
Elliot finally says out loud the one I think everyone’s already thinking about
(but not saying): tobacco.
That shuts down the conversation and they move on to the next agenda
item.
A few days later I have my performance review. It’s all going well until Joel
starts talking about how I’m confusing to him. “In many ways you fly under
the radar,” he says. “Like in all the Internet.org stuff, you know. You show
up, you understand all the complexity, and you’ve got this amazing poker
face and you’ll just sit there taking it all in, and when the moment’s right
you drop in the perfect advice or the reality check or whatever it is that we
need at that time. It’s amazing. And then sometimes it’s just the complete
opposite and you have absolutely no poker face.”
He pauses and I try to control every muscle to make the perfect poker
face, and say in an expressionless, even tone, “Could you perhaps give me

an example?”
He pauses, thinks, and then says, “Oh yeah, I’ve got a great one.”
I can tell he’s thrilled with whatever he’s about to say next. I use all my
self-control to not react and to keep my poker face anchored in place. I pick
up my pen and indicate I’m ready for him to go on.
“The board meeting. That was a classic.”
“Could you say more?”
“Yes,” he enthuses. “You’re in a meeting with Mark, Sheryl, and the
entire Facebook board and there were a couple of times where I saw you, in
fact the whole room saw you, rolling your eyes.”
“Do you happen to know when that was?” I ask as neutrally as possible,
keeping my eyes straight on.
He pauses and thinks but can’t seem to place it. We sit in silence until I
decide, perhaps injudiciously, to speak.
“Was it maybe when one of our board members was suggesting to our
largely Jewish leadership team that Facebook needs to get much closer to
the far-right political parties in Europe because that is where the power is
shifting to?”
This was the proposal that we should use the election support and
campaign tools we were offering to US presidential candidates (and that
Donald Trump was using aggressively in his 2016 campaign)—and offer
them to the Alternative für Deutschland, the far right in Germany, and to
Marine Le Pen and the Front National, the far right in France. Getting
closer to these political parties and helping them into government would be
the most effective way to stop governments from regulating Facebook.
I say this realizing that my poker face is slipping.
“Well sure,” Joel says. “But whatever it was, you can’t be rolling your
eyes and making faces at the board.”
That’s true and I apologize for it. By way of explanation, I tell Joel that
I understand that some board members think fascists could solve our
regulatory issues and we need to cozy up to them right away. And that I’d
expected more pushback from the rest of the board.
Other than that, Joel tells me, great review!
I do not roll my eyes in response.


31
A Heartwarming Story
In March 2016, a Facebook vice president in Brazil, Diego Dzodan, is
arrested on the way to work. This is because WhatsApp—which Facebook
owns—refused to hand over messages in a Brazilian drug trafficking case.
I’d worked closely with Diego, a charismatic Argentinian, and liked him.
Smart, savvy, and a genuinely nice guy with an impeccable sense of style.
A few months before his arrest, WhatsApp had been blocked for two
days by the Brazilian courts for similar reasons, and during those two days,
Telegram (a rival messaging app) picked up 1.5 million users in Brazil,
reaffirming Mark’s conviction that Facebook must avoid being blocked at
any cost. After that block, Mark wrote a Facebook post to rally Brazilians,
saying, “Please make your voice heard and help your government reflect
the will of its people.” People did what he asked for and started contacting
President Rousseff’s office, which was unfortunate because she had nothing
to do with this block. It was ordered by a Brazilian court. The president’s
chief of staff reached out to express the president’s displeasure.
I relayed this message to Mark and recommended he delete the post or,
at the very least, edit out the line urging people to contact the government.
After he struck the line, the president’s office leaked to the press that Mark
had changed his post at their request. Which was embarrassing. Mark was
furious they talked to the press and made him look weak. So there was bad
blood between the two sides, even before one of our executives was sitting
in a jail cell in São Paulo.

That post has come back to haunt us now, in Diego’s case. Before Diego
was arrested, our legal team went in front of a judge and argued that he
should not have a Facebook employee arrested for something WhatsApp
did. They’re separate companies. Diego has nothing to do with WhatsApp.
The judge doesn’t buy it. He says of course Facebook and WhatsApp are
the same company, and as proof, in his ruling he quotes Mark’s December
Facebook post calling on Brazilians to “make your voice heard” after
WhatsApp was blocked. So it’s fine to arrest the most senior Facebook
employee in Latin America for something WhatsApp did.
He really wants those WhatsApp messages.
At the request of the head of sales, Mark somehow manages to get a
Facebook Messenger message through to Diego, who responds quickly,
“Thank you Mark! It’s an honor to receive this note. Everything is fine here
and the legal team is doing a great job. This is our part in making the world
more open and connected.… Count on me!”
Mark loves this and emails a few of us:
Diego’s reaction (“you can count on me!”) to being arrested for upholding our stance on
protecting our community is deeply heart-warming.
Do you have an issue with me writing this up as a short story to post on my page? I think this
story says a lot about our protection of our community, our culture and our technology.
I mean, I guess it does, but not in the way he thinks. Instead of helping
figure out how to do everything possible to get Diego out of jail, Mark
wants to turn this into a teachable moment for users and governments
around the world.
He puts together a draft post:
I have a heartwarming story to share.
To protect our community and keep you safe, all messages you send
on WhatsApp are encrypted. This means your messages are so
secure that we couldn’t access them even if we wanted to, and
neither can governments or hackers.

Of course some governments that want access to your messages
don’t like this, and yesterday Brazilian police arrested Diego
Dzodan, the leader of our Sao Paulo office, for protecting someone
in our community and not turning over messages we couldn’t access
ourselves.
Hard for me not to interrupt here to point out that “someone in our
community” is an accused drug trafficker who’s threatened to assassinate
the judge in this case. In an email, Elliot points out to Mark that “we will
face criticism couching this as ‘safety for our community.’” Mark went on
to draft the rest of his post.
As soon as I heard about Diego’s arrest, I immediately sent him a
message to let him and his family know we were doing everything
we could to get him freed. He sent me the most amazing reply from
jail:
“Thank you Mark! It’s an honor to receive this note. This is our part
in making the world more open and connected. Count on me!”
Wow. So powerful. That’s from someone on our team in jail for
protecting our community.
I know I can count on Diego, and hopefully you can also feel a little
safer communicating with your friends because you know people
like Diego are fighting for our community and you know you can
count on them too.
We all try to explain to Mark why posting this is a terrible idea. For starters,
it’s hard to frame our actions as “protecting our community” when the
government wants these WhatsApp messages to prosecute a criminal
organization that murders and kidnaps people. To say nothing of the active
assassination threat they’ve made against the judge.
And from a legal point of view, the post would be disastrous. In an
email, our general counsel says this is not the moment for Mark to pick a
fight with Brazilian law enforcement:

This risks inflaming LE [law enforcement] in Brazil and heightens the risk that Diego
personally faces (the case is still active) and all other employees in Brazil face. The situation
there is fluid, the judge is unpredictable, and this could get worrisome quickly.
Elliot points out that if Mark posts this message, he’d be destroying our
main defense to get Diego out of jail. They’ve concluded that our best shot
is to go into court and again argue that WhatsApp is a different company
from Facebook, so it’s wrong to jail a Facebook employee over WhatsApp
messages. In his post, Mark’s admitting the two companies are the same
company, with him at the head. The general counsel says that if the judge
saw Mark’s post, it would sink that line of defense and “make it harder to
release the next person who gets arrested.”
I read those words and get a chill. The next person who gets arrested?
Now these guys are building that into their business plan?
Mark is not bothered. He still wants to post. Elliot sends him a
breathless email stating, “The consensus (rare) among your advisors is to
NOT post this—too complicated in Brazil and may meaningfully jeopardize
Diego and our teams in the country.” Mark pushes back and asks Elliot to
draft an alternative post that might not be as damaging, which Elliot sends
him, advising again that even the alternative “risks triggering a negative
reaction from the court” and “the danger created by sharing this post in
Brazil outweighs its benefits outside the country.”
Throughout all of this, Mark could not be more disappointing. Despite
saying in his note that “we are doing everything to get him free,” he doesn’t
seem to be worried about Diego in the slightest. He seems to see this, first
and foremost, as an opportunity to write a great Facebook post. A
heartwarming story. If he cared even slightly about Diego’s welfare, or felt
responsible for him as his boss, he wouldn’t be insisting on posting his little
message to the world, something that could do great harm, before he goes
out to dinner. He’d be doing everything possible, calling Brazil’s president,
calling the many Brazilian legislators I introduced him to when he was
lobbying for Internet.org, and begging them to make public statements
supporting Diego’s release. Doing all the things I’m doing. That kind of
pressure coming from him would be more effective than coming from me. I

make this case with Elliot, who’s talking to Mark, telling him a general
should stay on the field with his troops.
While everyone’s arguing about the post, Diego has his day in court.
It comes down to an appeals court that thankfully issues an order at 3:30
A.M. releasing Diego, less than one full day after he was arrested.
I come away from this feeling disgusted with Mark, and truly seeing him
differently. That could’ve been me in jail—in Myanmar, South Korea,
Thailand, or any of the other places I’ve traveled for Facebook. Or it could
have been any member of my team. And I guess I had this last vestige of
hope that at the moment one of us was locked up, the cavalry would come
to save us. Or at least one of the world’s richest men would do everything in
his power. But when it happens, when one of his employees is sitting in jail,
instead of doing everything he can, as the most powerful person at the
company, Mark obsesses over some stupid post and then goes out to dinner.
This seems such an obvious failing of a basic test of normal human
decency.
Five years earlier when I arrived at Facebook, Mark didn’t have a
theory of how he and the company should be in the world; he didn’t really
have developed opinions about policy or politics, beyond “sign up more
users.” The rest of Facebook’s leadership wasn’t very different. Mark really
couldn’t be bothered to care. Now he’s developed priorities, and they’re
mostly pretty horrible and ignorant of the human costs.
My original hope that when he started to exercise power on the world
stage, meeting with presidents and prime ministers, it would be an
education in responsibility and accountability—that’s really turned out to be
a bust. He disappoints again and again.
This thing with Diego confirms something I didn’t want to admit to
myself: I have to leave Facebook. I start calling around looking for a new
job. For so long now, I’ve been able to convince myself that I can do more
good inside Facebook than outside, but now I understand I probably can’t.
My problematically pregnant state makes this complicated. Realistically,

how am I going to land and then start a new job when I’m days away from
giving birth? I feel trapped.

32
What to Not Expect When You’re Expecting
One of the random places I’d traveled in service of Facebook was João
Pessoa, a remote city in northeastern Brazil. I hadn’t thought about it much
since. Not until I read a New York Times article tracking the development
and discovery of something called the Zika virus. This was before there was
a lot of interest in Zika, but because I’m pregnant I read the article in detail.
There’s something about it that unsettles me but I can’t place it.
It’s later in the day when I’m unloading the dishwasher that I connect
the discomfort with the trigger. The article was focused on mothers and
babies in Paraíba State, which had seemed vaguely familiar. Tentatively I
type “João Pessoa State of Brazil” into my phone and Google quickly
returns, “João Pessoa, port city, capital of Paraíba state.” I immediately feel
a stabbing, sick feeling in my stomach—not from the baby kicking.
This place is remote. It took more than twenty hours of flying to get
there from San Francisco. I force myself to reread the newspaper story. It
describes the mothers of Zika babies as “ghosts—mute, expressionless
figures in corridors holding babies whose foreheads seem to have
vanished.” I’m typing different queries into Google hoping I’ll find
something to convince me there’s nothing to worry about, but it does the
opposite. João Pessoa is at the heart of the Zika outbreak, there are
hundreds of cases, and the number of children with suspected microcephaly
is increasing tenfold weekly.
I can’t even think about how I’m going to tell Tom. He didn’t want me
traveling to all these weird places when I was pregnant, and I’d blithely

assured him he was wasting his worry on nothing. I’d had no idea I was at
any risk. Of course I wouldn’t have gone if I was.
It feels like this job is taking too much from me, permeating everything,
poisoning everything.
It takes a while to get an appointment with my doctor and the wait is
agony. When I don’t feel the baby’s kicks for a few hours, I convince
myself it’s because of microcephaly. Being pregnant is already an
experience full of fear and guilt for me—am I eating right, doing enough
exercise, getting enough rest? And now there’s this searing, sleep-depriving
knowledge that I’d unintentionally put my baby in harm’s way, and the
crushing fear and guilt that go with that.
It’s hard to think about anything else.
When I finally see my doctor, I can tell she’s underwhelmed by my
concern. She explains that ever since the New York Times piece, she’s been
inundated with middle-class mommies who’ve been to Florida or Mexico
on vacation who are worried they now have a Zika baby.
“But I was in João Pessoa earlier in my pregnancy.”
She’s unmoved.
“It’s the epicenter of the outbreak.”
“Did you even have a mosquito bite?” she says, still skeptical. I pull up
a photo of my body covered in them that I’d sent to Tom during the trip,
worried that I’d been bitten by bedbugs.
Still unimpressed, she grudgingly books me in for an ultrasound. She
cautions that they still don’t really know much about the disease and that
means both diagnosis and treatment are difficult.
The day of the ultrasound, as I lie prone on the chair, feet in stirrups, the
technician peppers me with questions about why I traveled somewhere so
dangerous. I bristle and tell her I didn’t know about the risk, and we fall
into an awkward silence.
“How do you diagnose it?” I ask.
“We haven’t diagnosed any here. I don’t think there’s been a Zika baby
born in the US yet.…”
That “yet” hangs in the air.
“What are you looking for?”

“Calcification around the eyes, head size, anything abnormal. You
heading back into work?”
Why was she trying to change the subject? What was she seeing on that
screen?
In the end, they don’t spot anything, but they also tell me that they
probably wouldn’t be able to diagnose it while the baby’s still inside me. As
one of the doctors put it, “We don’t really know exactly what we’re looking
for anyway.”
After months of quiet Zika-related terror, just a week after Diego’s arrest,
I’m more than relieved to deliver a healthy, Zika-free baby girl in March
2016.
But as she’s placed in my arms I can’t stop shaking, and as I keep trying
to grip her more firmly the shaking intensifies. Worried I’m going to drop
her, I quickly hand her back to Tom. I try to stop the shaking, but after
many hours of labor I’m exhausted and can’t seem to control my body.
The nurse who was there for the hardest parts of the delivery, Lauren, is
still around. With long brown hair and a kind face, she’s been a source of
comfort throughout.
“It’s okay,” I reassure her. “I’m actually okay. I’m just tired.”
She doesn’t accept my assurances and instead gets more blankets and
remains in the room, ostensibly tidying things, but something feels off. Why
is she still here?
“Lauren—is the baby okay?” She strolls over to perform a cursory
check on the sleeping newborn.
“She’s beautiful and she’s okay.” She returns to tidying. I feel so broken
that I can’t even remove my feet from the stirrups they were in during the
delivery. I sink into an exhausted silence. Eventually, under questioning
from Tom, Lauren admits that she’s worried about the amount of blood I’m
continuing to lose. She starts to weigh the towels that have been placed
around me to collect the blood that continues to flow and calls for the
doctor on duty. After that doctor, others arrive. My shaking evolves into
convulsions.

By now I know it’s serious; Lauren keeps cleaning up the blood but it’s
flowing thick and fast. I feel drained and hollow, beyond exhaustion. The
basics of existing—breathing, listening, and feeling—are thick, heavy,
almost insurmountable tasks.
The room fills with various doctors and nurses who barely acknowledge
me as they plunge needles and attach me to machines. A new nurse pushes
Lauren to the side when she arrives, but I manage to grab Lauren’s hand
and beg her with my eyes not to leave the room. I periodically remove my
oxygen mask to ask Tom and Lauren to check on the baby, who remains
peacefully in the corner.
Time slows down as pain expands. It radiates from my swollen belly but
I can see that all of me is swelling up. The new nurse attached a blood
pressure cuff to my arm when she arrived; it feels like it’s burning through
my swollen skin. Every time I summon the energy to remove the mask and
try to speak, to tell her to fix the cuff, she scolds me, dismissing me and
replacing the mask without even glancing at the cuff.
The medical team keep pushing Tom back into the corner but he fights
his way forward. I manage to nod toward my arm, and Tom immediately
grasps what’s going on when he sees the cuff like a rubber band depressed
between red swollen skin that looks and feels as if it is about to burst. The
nurse also dismisses him when he tries to call her attention to it. He hauls
the lead doctor into the corridor and insists that this nurse is removed and
Lauren is returned to my side. I keep thinking how awful it must be for him
to sit watching all of this unfold.
Eventually one of the medical staff remembers the baby and asks to
have her removed. I try to protest, removing the oxygen mask to object, my
body still craving to hold her, feed her, see her.
But I’m silenced, the mask replaced, and the baby removed. I feel like
I’m starting to succumb. It’s hard to breathe, even with the oxygen mask.
I motion for Tom to come and remove my mask. “Get Debbie, get
Sadie, get them to come here, for you, for the baby.” As I start to consider
how bad this might get, I want someone here to look after Tom. I don’t want
Tom to be alone for what I suspect is about to happen. I’m dying.

I hear my doctor ordering lots of blood product and threatening to go and
get it herself if it doesn’t arrive faster.
I fight to stay conscious. What no one tells you about those final
moments as you battle to hold on is how seductive unconsciousness is.
How, when you’ve reached the end of exhaustion, there’s something so
wonderfully inviting in succumbing to the sleepy comfort of numb
unconsciousness. The respite. How each time you fight to pull yourself out
of the calm nothingness, you’re plunged back not just into consciousness
but physical torment. Bright lights, frantic voices, the struggle for each
breath, and complete searing pain. I fight with everything I have to try to
stay awake. The idea of never holding my new baby is too awful. Of never
seeing Sasha again. To say nothing of leaving Tom alone.
I reopen my eyes in an operating room.
“I think she’s back with us,” I hear someone say, and I start to look
around for Tom and Lauren but my head is heavy and I can’t bring anything
into focus. My doctor comes into view and welcomes me back, saying
something about how an anesthesiologist was about to knock me out so it’s
lucky timing that I joined them now. As if I’d just arrived at a neighborhood
barbeque.
I ask repeatedly for Tom, I need him, and wheeze, “No anesthetic.”
My doctor looks confused, then explains that I’m in an operating room
undergoing emergency surgery and it’s very serious. I summon all my
energy to say, “If you have general anesthetic … you can’t breastfeed … for
three days.” This urgent need to breastfeed; funny how raw and powerful
these basic maternal instincts are. Even when I am incapable of anything
else.
“Sarah, I don’t think you understand the situation.” My doctor pauses—
maybe not wanting to tell me I’m dying? She then explains that Tom has
already consented on my behalf.
“I have to feed my baby. You need consent. My consent. Not his.” I’m
desperate to stay conscious and see and hold and feed my baby. “Not his,” I
insist.
“Sarah, you’re very, very sick.…” I can tell my very capable doctor is
both bemused and frustrated, arriving at an impasse that will rob her of

precious time. She tries a different approach.
“Someone give her a pen,” she says.
And before I know it a pen comes into my line of vision. I reach for it
but realize I can’t control my body. My hands won’t connect with the pen.
When I get close to it my fingers can’t grasp it.
“Sarah, are you able to get that pen and sign those forms?”
I’m frozen, my voice is stuck, and I feel thick, suffocating terror.
Defeated, I shake my head no. An anesthesiologist moves into position and
before I can register what is happening, a numb dark blackness moves
through my body, stifling the thoughts and feelings I’m desperately clinging
to as signs of life.
The next thing I see are white walls. As my eyes focus I see a clock on the
wall and a whiteboard with the message “Call Sadie” scrawled on it. There
are incessant beeps and dings but everything else is enveloped in a thick
silence.
The pain cuts through the grogginess but it’s a different type of pain. I
feel almost as if I’m choking. My stomach is an empty bump. Where’s
Tom? Where’s my baby? I’m alone.
Sadie emerges through a curtain. She seems completely at ease, as if
she’s been here for days.
“You’re awake!” she exclaims excitedly.
“Where’s Tom? Where’s the baby?” I gasp frantically. She strains to
hear me. “The baby, where’s the baby?”
Sadie shakes her head. Then, very slowly, as if talking to an elderly
relative, she says, “I can’t hear you. You have a machine in your throat
helping you breathe. You’re in intensive care. You’re on life support. You’re
very sick.”
I try to say “baby” loud enough to break through the pipe in my throat,
but she continues to shake her head. “Tom,” I try. “Where’s Tom? Tom.”
Sadie shakes her head again.
It doesn’t make sense. Tom should be here. The only reason he wouldn’t
be here is if there was something seriously wrong with him … or the baby.

Panic spurs a burst of adrenaline and I hoarsely yell “baby, baby, baby”
into the void of the ventilator. Sadie tries to placate me by putting together
words in sentences that make no sense. She says nothing about the key
point of where Tom and the baby are. Maybe our baby’s dead? The very
thought of it makes me claw at the machines, trying to remove the
ventilator from my throat so I can leave and find my baby. Before I can,
medical professionals hurriedly appear and I realize too late that, in their
rushing and pushing of buttons and turning of switches, I’ve been sedated.
When I wake again Debbie’s sitting beside my bed.
She pulls a notebook and pen from her stylish designer handbag. I reach
for it and my hands fail me, again. Debbie pushes the pen into my hand and
the notebook under it. I know I have to play it cool or I’ll be knocked
unconscious again. I can barely move my hands but I scratch out, “Am I
tied to bed?”
Debbie nods. Two clear plastic restraints tie me to the bed. All I want to
do is leave this ICU and see my baby.
“I worried about her. Can I hold her?” I write strenuously but trying to
play it casual.
Debbie gently but firmly shakes her head no. I don’t know if that’s
because of me or because of the baby. I feel as if the floor is falling out
from under me.
Soon Tom walks in. I’m so relieved to see him I can feel tears in my
eyes, but the ventilator makes it difficult to actually do the other parts of
crying; sobbing makes me choke against the tube in my throat. When Tom
looks at me he starts to cry. I’ve rarely seen Tom cry.
“I’m sorry; I don’t know why I’m crying. I haven’t throughout
everything,” he reassures me, as if I would somehow think less of him. “It’s
just they told me to be prepared because you might not…” He breaks off as
his tears well up. “But you made it. And Xanthe’s okay.”
I’m confused.
“Xanthe?” I write.
Tom looks down, a hint of shame in his face.
“You named the baby?” I write, incredulous. I can feel Debbie shift
silently on her chair, suddenly uncomfortable.

“Um, Xanthe Juliet, middle name for my mother, but … we can change
the name,” he says hurriedly.
At that moment, his phone buzzes and I can see a notification saying,
“Xanthe is due for her next feed.” And I know, in that instant, that her name
will never be changed.
Tom fills me in on some of what I missed while I was in the coma.
Apparently, I’m in an intensive care unit at a completely different hospital
from where I was when I was last conscious in the operating room after
giving birth. From what I piece together, at some point before, during, or
after labor I suffered an amniotic fluid embolism. He explains that means
something entered my bloodstream—either amniotic fluid or some part of
the baby like fetal cells or hair—and stopped the blood from clotting.
He tells me I had more than thirty-five blood transfusions, the entirety
of all the blood currently in my body more than three or four times over.
Tom says they just kept pumping more blood and blood products into me
but the blood just flowed out. After hours of doing this, nothing was
working. It was just after midnight, and they tried one last intervention.
Something went right and my body started responding. He tells me I’m
lucky, the doctors saved my life.
After a few days, I’m finally reunited with Xanthe. The moment I ached
for, holding her properly for the first time, but instead of relief, I’m
overpowered by a sense of guilt. That from the outset I’ve failed this sweet
defenseless baby who has been in the other hospital’s nursery all the time I
was in the ICU; both of us in the care of strangers.
Dying in childbirth while working in Silicon Valley is like being killed
by a horse and carriage or consumption or a duel. Something that belongs in
a different century or a different country. Weeks before this I was playing
ping-pong in virtual reality with Mark Zuckerberg and the prime minister of
Singapore. How did I go from that to nearly dying the sort of silent death
you see in a nineteenth-century novel?
And yet it’s not. In fact, it’s a very modern American way to die. The
US has the highest maternal mortality rate in the developed world.
Shockingly, it’s on the rise.

When it’s time to go home, I’m rolled out of the hospital in a wheelchair
because I still can’t walk. Lauren, who helped get me and Xanthe through
so much, sends me a note:
“I hope that someone tells her one day how hard you fought for her life
and your own.”
I have no idea how we’ll cope. I can’t walk, because my back was
somehow damaged when I was moved between hospitals. I’m still losing
blood and incredibly weak from that. Tom’s exhausted and due back at
work soon, our families are both in other countries, we barely know anyone
in San Francisco. I have no idea how we’ll look after a newborn and a
toddler.
It’s still only a few weeks after Diego’s arrest and I know I should be
looking for another job. Coming so close to death only reinforces my
feeling that I have to leave Facebook. I think about it constantly. But it’s
hard to move that forward when I need to give all I have to this sweet baby.
When I’m physically wrecked. How do I do it?
After less than a week at home, I hemorrhage while putting Sasha to
bed. Tom finds me in the bathroom in a small pool of blood and calls an
ambulance. After two days, I check myself out of the hospital, but I
continue to lose blood every day. I hide the extent of it from Tom because I
can tell he’s already at the breaking point, but each time I use the bathroom
there’s so much blood I feel like I need to roll out crime scene tape. Lacking
that, I just carefully wipe everything in the bathroom clean, to hide the
evidence that something is very wrong.

33
Do We Have to Go into This?
I’m not well. I continue to lose significant amounts of blood for months and
struggle to do basic activities. I get to the supermarket with the baby and
toddler and realize I don’t have the strength to walk through the aisles, so I
head home, stopping on benches to rest along the way. There’s a quiet
desperation to everyday life.
None of this seems to matter to Joel. He knows full well that I’m still on
maternity leave, sick and on strong pain medication, and yet messages and
emails from him and his assistant pile up daily. Less than two weeks after
I’ve discharged myself from the hospital, they set up a weekly meeting with
me. Because I’m in California and he’s in Washington, DC, they’re
videoconferences, but he starts to take them sprawled across his bed rather
than in his office. He’s in a T-shirt and who knows what else. I tell myself
the family photos surrounding his bed are proof he’s a family man and I
shouldn’t feel weird about it.
“Does me being in bed when we chat make you feel uncomfortable?” he
asks repeatedly, and it’s hard not to feel that’s the point.
One day he pushes further. On one of our regular video calls during my
maternity leave, he asks me how my health is. I keep my answer brisk and
professional: I’m still very sick, I’m going to need more surgery.
“But where are you bleeding from?” he asks.
My mind races. There is no way he doesn’t know.
“Seriously? Um, well, it’s the same place I’ve been losing blood from
all along.”

“What place?” he presses, insistent.
“Do we have to go into this?”
He stares me down from his bed, propped up by voluminous pillows,
and asks again about where the blood is coming from.
“I’m not really comfortable.”
“Come on, Sarah,” he pushes.
“Well, it’s not my eyes.…”
He starts to get angry.
“I have to go.” I exit the videoconference and call Tom. Then I call
Debbie and tell her too. I trust her and she’s been at Facebook for years.
She has no advice for me.
Elliot, Joel, and others in senior leadership chip in together for a night
nanny for a few weeks, which on one level is so thoughtful—it’s thousands
of dollars that we absolutely couldn’t afford—and on the other feels like a
message of “get back to work.” Tom suggests we refuse the gesture but that
feels rude.
During maternity leave, Joel presses me to join a “leadership offsite” in
Hyderabad, India, that’s scheduled a few weeks after I’ll return to work. It
looks like a waste of time. The focus is team building—it’s lots of tourism
and meals—not making any real decisions.
And honestly, I’m scared. The blood loss continued for a long time,
months after the baby was born. I’m very weak. The doctors didn’t know
why; they suspected an artery had been incorrectly fused to a vein during
the crisis, but they couldn’t tell without operating. By the time my return-to-
work date nears I’m postsurgical but recovering slowly, and I don’t want to
do it. My body isn’t strong. There are still unresolved issues. I’m still losing
blood; medical professionals struggle to draw blood at every regular blood
draw and no one knows why. It’s a twenty-hour flight. I’m afraid of
hemorrhaging again, and the medical advice is that I should not wean the
baby, whom I don’t want to leave, until I’m fully healthy.
Raising this with Joel is excruciating.
“On India,” I start nervously. “I know you want me to, so I’m planning
to go, if I can figure out a way not to wean my daughter. Although if you
don’t need me, I’d prefer to stay.”

“You mean breastfeeding?” he asks.
“Yes,” I say.
“Explain breastfeeding to me.” He looks expectantly at me.
“What?”
“Explain breastfeeding to me.”
Ugh. This, again.
“I need to keep up my supply in order to continue breastfeeding,” I say
as neutrally as possible, trying to keep things professional. But this doesn’t
satisfy him. He continues to push.
Eventually, I shut the conversation down by telling him I’ll explain my
concerns directly to his assistant. I tell her how badly it went with the breast
pump in Turkey and my worries for India. This persuades no one. I’m sent a
breast pump and booked for India.
I return to work in August 2016. My first day back, Joel decides to do a
performance review, as he says “it’s performance review season.” A quick
Google search confirms my suspicion that you are not supposed to be given
a performance review of your maternity leave. In fact, I understand that
pushing someone to work during their maternity leave is against the law.
Nevertheless.
“You weren’t responsive enough,” he says.
“In my defense, I was in a coma for some of it.”
“It’s not just me, Sarah. Some of your other colleagues found it
challenging to engage with you.”
“I mean, you know, I was in hospital, in a coma and near death, but I
accept that this did make it hard to engage with me at times.”
Irrespective, this leads him to conclude that there were “issues limiting
my effectiveness” and both he and my peers say I was “difficult to work
with during this period.” Sadly, he notes that he is unable to put a formal
performance rating in the system to accompany this feedback because I was
“out of the system” for most of the performance cycle, but he wants me to
know that if he could, it would be bad.
I don’t really understand what is happening and it’s only the first day
back, so I reach out to the policy team’s HR person, Stacey Tomey. Over

Zoom I see that her home office is decorated with framed menus from
Michelin-star restaurants she’s dined in.
“I’ve had to work a lot during maternity leave.”
“I’m aware,” she responds. It takes a minute for that to sink in. They
knew. I’d thought Joel was doing this and no one knew.
“I’m worried about India, especially pumping.” I explain my fear that
I’ll start hemorrhaging again during forty hours in the air. I let her know
that the idea of me traveling to India while I’m still having medical issues is
causing a lot of stress in my house. I don’t reveal the extent of Tom’s
distress.
“You can fly with me,” she offers. “That way if anything goes wrong
you’ll have someone onboard.”
That might be helpful only if Stacey could obtain a medical degree
before the flights. Otherwise, what exactly is she going to do if there’s a
postsurgical medical emergency?
“You can lean on me and Joel’s assistant.” This is her solution to both
the medical issue and Joel’s behavior. When the two of us meet up with
Joel’s assistant in India, she christens the three of us “the tripod” and sets up
a “tripod” group chat.
At the opening “strategy meeting” in Delhi, Joel gathers his leadership
team and asks us each to identify the biggest risks for the company over the
coming year. Predictably Erin Egan, head of privacy, says “privacy.” Kevin
Martin, who’s in charge of Internet.org and connectivity efforts, says
“internet connectivity.” And so on.
When it’s my turn, I try to talk about a disturbing new trend in how
politicians are using Facebook. The day before the offsite started, the
Filipina journalist Maria Ressa published a groundbreaking series. It
outlined how the new president of the Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte, had
weaponized Facebook to propel himself into power. He was an outsider
candidate running against insiders, but using paid ads and a network of
social media volunteers, his campaign chipped away at facts, with political
pages masquerading as credible sources of information to pump out half-
truths. Combined with the power of bots, fake accounts, and trolls on social
media, they fabricated an alternative reality that manipulated people by

sowing fear, uncertainty, and doubt. The campaign harnessed Facebook’s
algorithm, which optimizes for eyeballs and doesn’t distinguish between
fact and fiction.
Maria Ressa brought all this information to my team before publication
while I was on maternity leave, but my bosses didn’t really get it. They did
nothing.
Duterte is a brutal political figure who said he would enforce law and
order by allowing—or possibly collaborating with, given he claimed to
have thrown someone out of a helicopter—death squads who’ve killed over
a thousand people. He’s praised the murders publicly. And he’s far from the
only leader using Facebook in troubling ways. Juntas in Thailand and
Myanmar are using enterprising methods to suppress speech, incite fear,
and spy on their citizens. They falsely claim that Facebook shares user
information and data with them to suppress dissent on the platform.
The Facebook presidents are no longer “good guys” and “friends of the
United States” like Joko Widodo, Enrique Peña Nieto, and Justin Trudeau.
Regimes that want to control and censor their populations now understand
the power of Facebook to monitor what’s being said about them and who’s
saying it. Duterte’s playbook of misinformation and trolling has been so
successful, of course others will imitate it. We’ve been cozying up to these
candidates and happily making money off of them, and we really need to
rethink. By this time Brexit has already happened and the leadership at
Facebook are steadfastly avoiding acknowledging any role Facebook may
have played in that. There are some important elections coming up,
including the US election next month.
That’s the moment I lose the room. It’s blank looks everywhere. Joel
listens, eyes darkening.
“Thanks, Sarah, I think we’ve got a few more immediate things to
worry about. We’ll let the US team handle the US election.”
I know that the way he sees it, US politics is outside my expertise and
very different from whatever I’m seeing in what he calls “tin pot” countries
like the Philippines, Myanmar, and Thailand. Also, and maybe more
importantly: everyone in this room understands we’re making record
amounts of money off the Trump campaign, with all its misinformation and

trolling. As far as Joel’s concerned, Facebook doesn’t need to worry about
outsider candidates like Trump. In fact, they’re great for Facebook because
of how much money they bring in, and Joel cares about that. If they’re
peddling outrage and stretching the truth, well, Joel understands that
outrage and stretching the truth are just part of the game, part of politics.
Joel was at the Brooks Brothers riot, after all.
Outrage is a lucrative business for Facebook right now, a month before
the election, and Joel’s determined that his team contributes to Facebook’s
bottom line. I remember seeing his name as the first one to like an internal
post from our political ads team—the one he created—celebrating the
record spending by Republicans in the Iowa caucuses. And when the team
posted that Ted Cruz’s Facebook strategy has “put money in all of our
pockets and that’s what we call sweet, sweet coin,” underneath it read, “Joel
Kaplan and 22 others like this post.”
If anything, Facebook rewards outsider candidates who post
inflammatory content that drives engagement. We charge less money for
ads that are more incendiary and reach more people. Trump is using our
system the way it’s designed to be used. From my point of view, that’s
incentivizing and rewarding the worst kinds of political ugliness.
Joel doesn’t seem to care at all, it’s all money. And what harm does it
do? He tells us it’s clear Clinton’s going to win anyway.

34
The Facebook Election
Joel’s wrong. Everyone’s wrong. So I’m curious to walk into Facebook
headquarters a month later, the morning after Trump’s victory.
There’s a hastily called meeting for the policy and communications
teams to discuss how everyone feels about the outcome. I’m surprised that
Joel and Elliot have thought to do that. It shows a sensitivity to people’s
emotions that is normally notable by its absence. Joel later confides that
they set it up because there was an ugly situation in the London office after
the Brexit vote a few months before. Most of the policy team was openly
devastated and it wasn’t handled well. The few who wanted Britain to leave
the EU felt personally attacked by the rest of the team, and it spiraled,
leaving bad blood between the two groups. Joel wants to avoid a repeat now
with Trump, between the Republicans who dominate his office and the rest
of Facebook, which is mostly Democrats and a lot of libertarians.
All the policy and communications teams in Silicon Valley are crammed
into a meeting room that’s too small, with the DC office projected on the
large white wall at the end of the room. Elliot struggles to find the right tone
for the political operatives assembled, some of whom have been embedded
with Trump’s election campaign, and settles on some vague opening
monologue about the importance of democracy and tolerance. Joel is upbeat
—visibly happy about Trump—and struggles to contain his disdain for the
collective outpouring of grief in the Silicon Valley headquarters. We’d all
walked by crying young staffers on our way in.

A Republican on the DC team had told me that Joel had “cut checks for
everyone except Trump.” And Joel admitted that he hadn’t voted for Trump.
So I ask him later in our one-on-one why he was so joyful on the call when
he was a very public Jeb Bush supporter.
“You’re looking at the election all wrong.” Joel’s tone is mildly
patronizing. “If you look at Trump’s agenda it’s the Republican agenda. It’s
the things we want. The things I want. It’s tax cuts. It’s less government.
He’ll get it done. Trump’s got the Senate. He’s got the House. It’s a decisive
victory. He can do things. Great things. Not only that, it’s going to be great
for tech and for business. Hands off, all systems go.”
He pauses, as if to check that I understand that this is good.
“Sure, there are some things on the margin thrown in that I’m not wild
about,” he concedes. “But the bulk of it is what the party wants, what I
want.”
I nod. Which he takes as acceptance of his point.
“My actual issue with the election is that Trump won’t go far enough on
the things that really will make a difference.”
“What are those?” I ask, already knowing but wanting to hear him say
it.
“Cutting entitlements,” he responds firmly. “The biggest weakness with
Trump is that without touching Social Security, Medicaid, Medicare, he’s
not going to meaningfully change that much. That’s the biggest
disappointment with this president. But on the whole, it’s a great outcome.”
In contrast to Joel, some of the senior distraught Democrats who
address the assembled group talk about their grief, pain, and fear of the
future following Trump’s win. It’s hard to ignore the eyerolls exchanged by
some of the Republicans on the DC team who forget that their faces are
being magnified and projected on the wall.
One of the younger employees in California raises her hand and says
timidly, “I worry for my friends who are Black and Hispanic.”
She doesn’t mention how “All Lives Matter,” a slogan created as a
negative rejoinder to “Black Lives Matter,” keeps popping up on the
Facebook graffiti walls all across campus (or that Mark and Sheryl’s
response was that “we have to assume positive intent”), or the TRUMP

SUPPORTERS WELCOME posters that materialized everywhere. Most of the
employees at headquarters are in their twenties, they’re on Facebook all the
time posting their political opinions, so there’s been a roiling political
tension at the company for months. There’s a prolonged silence, with Elliot
and Joel both avoiding any eye contact, before a white, bearded guy in his
early twenties stands up and says, “I want to be an ally.”
As he continues, sharing his feelings about the election and his thoughts
about being Black, or gay, or Muslim, or a woman in America in 2016, the
faces of the DC office projected across the wall are exquisite contortions. I
find myself inadvertently making eye contact with others in headquarters
who—like me—are scanning the room, forensically searching for a Black
or Hispanic face among the sea of fresh white faces, hoodies, and Patagonia
vests. There are only a few.
Instead, Joel shuts down these concerns, stating firmly, “There are a lot
of good guys in the Trump administration who want to do what’s best for
America.”
Another question comes from a young woman who probably has a
different idea from Joel about what’s best for America: “I’m worried about
what’s going to happen to immigration. What do we do about people who
don’t have immigration status?”
Elliot praises the question and makes a few bland statements. I’m lost in
thought about how many men there seem to be in the DC office projected
on the wall and whether they would also describe themselves as “good
guys” and how they’re still struggling to contain their shocked delight at the
outcome of the election when I tune in to hear, “Sarah will have some
thoughts on this, as she’s had difficult immigration challenges.”
There’s a moment of silence and everyone turns to me. I don’t respond
because I assume he must mean some other Sarah who would be qualified
to address the question in some way. Then I realize he means me. He’s
throwing the ball to me so he doesn’t have to talk any more about Trump’s
immigration plans.
“I don’t think the issue is New Zealand immigration,” I say. “But I do
know—”

Joel jumps in, alert to the fact I’m going off script, and assures everyone
that Facebook will look into this.
From the crush of people in the back corner of the room in
headquarters, someone asks, “Is it our fault? 2016’s ‘the Facebook
election.’”
It’s a relief to hear someone give voice to what I had been thinking. In
the lead-up to the election, this was the constant message inside the
company. We called it “the Facebook election” internally, and the company
had committed to dominating this election like no other. We all know
hordes of people across policy, communications, sales, product
management, and engineering who’ve been working full time on elections.
In presentations everyone’s been talking for months about how powerful
Facebook is and how effective it is as a tool to influence people and change
minds. How we’re in the “business of democracy.” Not to mention Joel’s
constant quest for our teams to be adding to the bottom line of the company
by selling political ads.
And yet Elliot looks baffled. He pushes off the question as if the mere
suggestion is preposterous.
“Facebook’s role and our role as employees is to make the world more
open and connected. That’s never been more important than it is now,”
Elliot concludes, and then shuts down the meeting before any follow-up
questions are asked.
They’re sentiments that are echoed by Mark onstage at the Techonomy
conference days later. Where he states categorically that the suggestion fake
news on Facebook influenced the election is a “pretty crazy idea” and then
follows up by saying that the “idea that that had any impact in the election
is pretty out there.”

35
Angry at the Truth
Mark Zuckerberg is mad. When he arrives at the airport, he’s fuming about
the suggestion he had any responsibility for the election results. We’re due
to leave for Peru, for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
summit.
I’m nervous. It was my idea that Mark should travel to Lima for APEC.
While I was on maternity leave, he’d emailed me, finally taking the
initiative on foreign policy. Specifically, he’d been thinking about how the
world is governed:
I’d like to learn more about this area—how the UN and the different international governance
institutions came into existence, what power and levers do they have to get things done, what
are their limitations and whether these are intentional or these organizations are being
marginalized, why they’re set up as a federation of nations as opposed to a democratically
elected international body, etc?
One specific topic I’m interested in is why no one is arguing for a significantly stronger
international government or system. That is, today’s system seems relatively weak—it has a
small budget, it is beholden to nations as opposed to being elected or controlled directly by
people globally, etc. Today it seems there are two primary proposals for how large countries
want to interact with the international system: continue as is, or increasing isolationism. I’m
curious why there isn’t a serious third option of strengthening this system further, and what
would be potentially required to make that happen. I’m looking for any recommendations on
how to learn about this: book recommendations, people to talk to or invite over for dinner, or
other resources to check out.
What I take from this is that he’s feeling Facebook’s rising power globally.
He has politicians from around the world wanting to come see him and kiss
the ring—the way they do with, say, Rupert Murdoch. He has this global

network, more political capital and more wealth than he can possibly spend,
and he’s wondering what he can use it for. What are the other institutions
that cross national borders? What powers do they have, compared with
Facebook? His speeches increasingly talk about “global community.” He
knows Facebook has a budget that’s larger than many nations’ GDPs and is
not “beholden to nations.” He could buy all the politicians of a country or
many countries if he chose to wield this power freely.
And so, I thought, if he’s thinking about using Facebook to do
something else, something more, in countries around the world, and he’s
wanting to understand how the international system works—or doesn’t—he
needs to see it up close. With that in mind, I pitch going to APEC. It’s
bigger than the international conference I took him to in Panama. Vladimir
Putin and Xi will be there, and this time Mark wouldn’t be showing up as a
salesman, trying to push Internet.org or Facebook. I wanted to put him in
situations that he’d be in if he were a head of state. I’m quietly hoping these
leaders will knock him around a little, get real with him about their
problems with Facebook, so he’s forced to grapple with the harmful effects
it has in many countries.
Mulling over what Mark seems to be imagining for himself on the
global stage, a vision popped into my head of Mark presiding over all the
heads of state in a meeting at APEC. A session where Mark and the most
powerful leaders around the world have some sort of reckoning and forge
agreement about some basic rules of the road for the internet. It was
preposterous to even think of it. No one would agree to elevating just one
CEO, raising him to the level of the most powerful heads of state in the
world, and having him preside over them. The White House had nixed him
even being onstage for a panel at the last big summit he attended. But I told
myself it was a good starting position for the negotiations with APEC on
how Mark would participate. If I ask for that, once they stop laughing,
they’re at least going to consider giving me some of the other things that I
actually stand a chance of getting.
So I was shocked—after months of negotiations—to get what I’d asked
for. As we prepare to take off for Peru, I still can’t believe it’s actually

going to happen, Mark running a meeting of presidents and prime ministers
exactly as I saw in my original vision.
Although we’re actually not about to take off because Mark didn’t bring
his passport.
A small group of Facebook executives mill around the bland, beige
terminal, which looks like a place that dispatches rental cars to middle
managers rather than private jets to tech titans. Mark’s pissed off. By now, I
can’t work out whether it’s just about the blame Facebook’s getting for the
election result, Trump’s election, the forgotten passport, or having to go to
Peru in the middle of it all. I worry it’s the last one. He was up for it when I
pitched it. He even suggested that we should see if the Obamas wanted to
do a trip to Machu Picchu with him.
Irrespective, he blames other people for all of those things, including
forgetting the passport. I guess that’s what it’s like to live in a bubble, like
Mark does. But a bubble implies flimsy transparency, a diaphanous space
where you can see a normal life just beyond your grasp. And what Mark
inhabits is more like a thick opaque dome, a murky fortress that separates
him from the rest of the world. When you have so many other people doing
things for you professionally and personally, you stop taking responsibility
for any of it. Max Weber said that dealing with unintended consequences of
your actions is what political responsibility is. This guy can’t even take
responsibility for leaving his passport at home, let alone influencing the US
election.
Andrea throws herself on the grenade, declaring that it’s all her fault the
passport isn’t here and that she should be supervising “Mark’s home staff”
more closely. Notable by its absence is any suggestion that it could have
occurred to Mark that a passport might be helpful to visit South America.
Elliot suggests, “Sarah, could you contact the president of Peru to see
whether we can get Mark in the country without his passport?”
“Yes,” Mark agrees quickly, “that would be good.”
“Even Mark Zuckerberg still needs a passport,” I gently tease Mark. It
doesn’t go over well. Fortunately, before I’m peer-pressured into making
the call to the president of Peru, Mark realizes he doesn’t have some

medication he needs. The decision is made to push back the flight departure
time while someone, not him, goes to get it.
This isn’t the first medical crisis to hit the trip. And not just because of
my ongoing medical issues. One Sunday a few months earlier during
“maternity leave,” I received an urgent call from Elliot.
“It’s Peru, it’s in trouble,” he informs me gravely. “Mark and Priscilla
are trying to conceive,” he shares in a whisper, never mind the fact we’re on
a phone call and no one can overhear us.
This immediately feels too intimate. Like we’re courtiers of conception
admitted into the royal bedroom.
“Riiiight,” I say warily.
“Well, you can guess the problem,” he says conspiratorially. I’m
guessing the dates of the summit don’t work out with the dates of ovulation,
but that is way too much information for me. CEO conception plans are
definitely not part of my job description. I let his statement hang there
unanswered.
“Zika,” he says. There’s no way that Mark can expose himself to Zika
or push back his plans for a second child. Mark had once told me that he
wanted a “tribe” of kids, so I understand his reluctance to delay.
Elliot had been talking to Mark and the current guidance was to wait
three months after travel to a Zika-infected area before trying to conceive,
so either the trip should be canceled or we should look at serious measures
to protect him from exposure.
At this time, Lima barely had any Zika. Neither Elliot nor I mention that
Facebook sent me to ground zero of the Zika outbreak while I was
pregnant, but it hangs in the air. Elliot asks me to see what the Peruvian
president’s office can do to stop Mark from getting Zika. Confidentially, of
course.
I assure him I’ll do everything I can.
In reality, I don’t even know how one broaches the idea of asking a
presidential office to safeguard your CEO’s sperm. Particularly when
you’ve already asked them for quite a lot lately. I raise it in the vaguest of
terms and make it sound like it’s me that’s worried about Zika and
conception. The lovely people I’ve been working with from the government

of Peru seem confused, knowing I have very recently given birth, have been
gravely ill, and at the time am supposedly on my maternity leave—like,
what sort of person am I? It’s very awkward, but I decide to let them
believe I am fecund and wanting a third child. It seems easier despite the
shame. Naturally, there’s little they can do to help, despite best intentions.
And so Facebook is considering extreme measures, or “operation
perfect sperm.” After a meeting about Zika risk that I’m not included in,
Andrea sends me a photo of a head-to-toe netting “bug suit” from an army
supply shop that the team thinks Mark should wear. I picture Mark meeting
with President Obama, Mark’s face obscured behind the gauzy net of the
costume, the president pausing briefly to remark on the texture of the net
and novelty of the net handshake, making some dad joke about “nothing but
net.” I respond like Andrea’s suggestion is a joke and hope that it is.
After Mark talks through every possible Zika mitigation method with
the head of the Centers for Disease Control and other experts, things get
more extreme. We change our plans to reduce time on the ground to an
absolute minimum and decide to build a “controlled structure” on the site of
the APEC conference center where ventilation, exposure to others, and bug
mitigation can be overseen by Facebook. Limited exposure to the outdoors,
sealed rooms, and controlled air supply. I think they’re joking about this
too, but before I know it I’m negotiating with the Peruvians for some land
near the conference to be dedicated to Facebook.
We’re a company that’s been accused of “digital colonialism,” and
recently board member Marc Andreessen fired off a series of tweets
suggesting that India was better off under British colonial rule. Constructing
a Silicon Valley replica in Peru on the grounds of the APEC conference to
meet with the heads of state of the world’s most powerful nations is not a
good look. But any concerns I raise are dismissed.
A large Facebook pop-up is dutifully erected onsite next to the
conference center. It’s grander than any of the places that heads of state are
meeting in. It replicates Mark’s meeting room in Menlo Park down to the
exact snacks stocked in the “micro kitchen.” If the bubble Mark lives in was
previously metaphorical, the Facebook pop-up makes it a real physical
structure.

At the airport, after a few hours, we finally board the private jet. Mark
sits in his leather chair, incensed. He cannot stop talking about the election.
It’s him, Elliot, a woman from the comms team, and me in a little quad of
chairs that face each other. Mark and Elliot have it out. Everyone else in the
cabin is pretty quiet.
Elliot’s communications team had briefed Mark going into the
Techonomy conference, and Mark’s still seething at how his remarks there
—that it’s a “crazy idea” that Facebook influenced the election—have been
universally rejected, even mocked. A headline in the New York Times that
week sums it up: “Mark Zuckerberg Is in Denial.” I agree. Mark still stands
by what he said. He believes it! It’s remarkable that a person who founded
one of the most powerful companies in the world, a business premised on
the notion that it can influence the brand of toothpaste you buy, has such
difficulty accepting that the platform where the president-elect spent vast
sums of money had any influence on the election. But this is where he is.
Having tried and failed with the “let Mark be Mark” communications
approach, Elliot’s mission for the flight is to pull him out of this denial and
figure out what in the world he should say about all this, going forward. He
can see the crisis in a way Mark can’t.
Over the course of the ten-hour flight to Lima, Elliot patiently explains
to Mark all the ways that Facebook basically handed the election to Donald
Trump. It’s pretty fucking convincing and pretty fucking concerning.
Facebook embedded staff in Trump’s campaign team in San Antonio for
months, alongside Trump campaign programmers, ad copywriters, media
buyers, network engineers, and data scientists. A Trump operative named
Brad Parscale ran the operation together with the embedded Facebook staff,
and he basically invented a new way for a political campaign to shitpost its
way to the White House, targeting voters with misinformation,
inflammatory posts, and fundraising messages. Boz, who led the ads team,
described it as the “single best digital ad campaign I’ve ever seen from any
advertiser. Period.”
Elliot walks Mark through all the ways that Facebook and Parscale’s
combined team microtargeted users and tweaked ads for maximum
engagement, using data tools we designed for commercial advertisers. The

way I understand it, Trump’s campaign had amassed a database, named
Project Alamo, with profiles of over 220 million people in America. It
charted all sorts of online and offline behavior, including gun registration,
voter registration, credit card and shopping histories, what websites they
visit, what car they drive, where they live, and the last time they voted. The
campaign used Facebook’s “Custom Audiences from Custom Lists” to
match people in that database with their Facebook profiles. Then
Facebook’s “Lookalike Audiences” algorithm found people on Facebook
with “common qualities” that “look like” those of known Trump supporters.
So if Trump supporters liked, for example, a certain kind of pickup truck,
the tool would find other people who liked pickup trucks but were not yet
committed voters to show the ads to.
Then they’d pair their targeting strategy with data from their message
testing. People likely to respond to “build a wall” got that sort of message.
Moms worried about childcare got ads explaining that Trump wanted
“100% Tax Deductible Childcare.” Then there was a whole operation to
constantly tweak the copy and the images and the color of the buttons that
say “donate,” since slightly different messages resonate with different
audiences. At any given moment, the campaign had tens of thousands of ads
in play, millions of different ad variations by the time they were done.
These ads were tested using Facebook’s Brand Lift surveys, which measure
whether users have absorbed the messages in the ads, and tweaked
accordingly. Many of these ads contained inflammatory misinformation that
drove up engagement and drove down the price of advertising. The more
people engage with an ad, the less it costs. Facebook’s tools and in-house
white-glove service created incredibly accurate targeting of both message
and audience, which is the holy grail of advertising.
Trump heavily outspent Clinton on Facebook ads. In the weeks before
the election, the Trump campaign was regularly one of the top advertisers
on Facebook globally. His campaign could afford to do this because the
data targeting enabled it to raise millions each month in campaign
contributions through Facebook. In fact, Facebook was the Trump
campaign’s largest source of cash.

Parscale’s team also ran voter suppression campaigns. They were
targeted at three different groups of Democrats: young women, white
liberals who might like Bernie Sanders, and Black voters. These voters got
so-called dark posts—nonpublic posts that only they would see. They’d be
invisible to researchers or anyone else looking at their feed. The idea was:
feed them stuff that’ll discourage them from voting for Hillary. One made
for Black audiences was a cartoon built around her 1996 sound bite that
“African Americans are super predators.” In the end, Black voters didn’t
turn out in the numbers that Democrats expected. In an election that came
down to a small number of votes in key swing states, these things mattered.
Mark quietly takes it all in. At first, he’s skeptical and pushing back, but
that gradually turns into curiosity. He starts to ask questions, trying to
understand the mechanics of it all. He doesn’t seem upset that the platform
would be used this way, not in the slightest. If anything, there’s admiration
for the ingenuity of it. Like, these tools were there all the time for anyone to
use this way. How smart that they figured it out.
I’m horrified to hear it laid out like this. I’d heard it before, a few days
after the election, at Sheryl’s business operations meeting, and had the same
reaction, a sense of sticky personal revulsion, knowing I work at the
company that did this. I can’t imagine how I would feel if I had created the
company. I honestly think I’d have a nervous breakdown right there on the
private jet, trigger an emergency landing somewhere over Mexico. It’s so
ugly. What a thing to be responsible for.
When all this was explained to Sheryl at that business operations
meeting, once she grasped what Trump’s campaign did, her immediate
response was not horror but that it was brilliant and innovative and do you
think we might have a shot at hiring Trump’s guy Brad Parscale to come
work at Facebook? No one said anything. After an awkward moment,
chastened, she shifted gears: “Of course that’s silly. He can have his pick of
jobs right now.” A pause. “But maybe there are others from the Trump
campaign we could bring inside Facebook?”
Mark appears to reach an altogether darker conclusion, but not
immediately. Through this whole flight, he’s still mulling over everything

Elliot laid out for him. Still occasionally pushing back but definitely
intrigued.
But before we land in Peru, Elliot doesn’t just need Mark to accept how
central and instrumental Facebook was in putting Trump into office. He also
needs to convince Mark to tell the world that he understands the role
Facebook played in the election—and that things are going to change. Elliot
wants Mark to post this on his Facebook page when we land, and he wants
him to include a concrete action plan listing changes that Facebook will
make to address misinformation. That’s what the world knows about and
people are upset about, all the fake news on the platform.
Mark is adamantly opposed to doing a post, but starting about halfway
into the ten-hour flight, he starts to engage Elliot about what he could say.
They begin drafting. By the time we land in Peru, Mark and Elliot are still
locked in battle. Mark’s fighting back against every one of the measures
that Elliot is pushing. They argue as we get off the plane. They argue in the
car to the hotel. They argue in the elevator up to Mark’s suite. They
continue arguing in his suite. Mark sees the very idea of this post as bullshit
capitulation. A shakedown by the press, which blames Facebook for
“stealing their livelihood.” As far as he’s concerned, the press keeps
inventing one fake Facebook scandal after another, trying everything they
can think of to damage the company, because of how it’s decimated their
businesses, and they’ve finally found something that might stick.
Elliot tells Mark that if he thinks that’s the real issue, then we should
beef up the profit sharing Facebook’s doing with news organizations. Buy
them off. Or at least be a little fairer. A year before this, Facebook created
something called Instant Articles, which shared ad revenue with newspapers
that posted content on the platform. We could go a lot further, Elliot tells
him. Mark’s not into that.
A few staffers watch them argue and offer suggestions. But I’m silent.
What’s the point? Mark sees how Facebook threw the election to Trump,
and now he’s arguing over a bunch of possible changes at Facebook that
won’t get to the heart of the matter anyway.
Hours after we get to the hotel, Mark’s post goes up and it’s almost
laughably on the nose:

The bottom line is: we take misinformation seriously.… We’ve been
working on this problem for a long time and we take this
responsibility seriously. We’ve made significant progress, but there
is more work to be done.
It’s a very equivocal post. With this next sentence, for instance, the first
half is all Mark and the second half Elliot: “While the percentage of
misinformation is relatively small, we have much more work ahead on our
roadmap.” But Mark does state plainly in the post that Facebook has to do a
better job catching misinformation and can’t rely on users to complain
about it first. Elliot pushed Mark to announce that we’d work with
journalists and fact-checking organizations. Mark doesn’t commit to that.
Instead there’s a vague promise to “learn from” fact-checking organizations
and to “work with journalists and others in the news industry to get their
input,” particularly about fact-checking. He also doesn’t commit to labeling
stories that we know are false but says that we’re “exploring” it. When
some commenters notice the timestamp on his post, he decides to address
them: “For those asking why I posted this at 9:30pm, that’s when I landed
and got into in [sic] Lima last night.”
Part of my pitch for attending APEC was the opportunity for Mark to
meet with President Xi of China. By this point, Mark had been trying to
meet him formally for years, with no success, and his eagerness to make it
happen was only increased by the screw-up in Seattle where Mark posted
the photo of the back of Xi’s head. While I didn’t believe in Facebook’s
strategy for entering China, I did see value in a meeting between the two, if
only as a reality check for Mark.
A formal bilateral meeting wasn’t going to happen. But maybe I could
wangle some kind of “spontaneous encounter” or “pull-aside.”
To achieve a spontaneous encounter, I had to get Mark in close
proximity to President Xi. State dinners were obviously out after our
experience in Panama. And President Xi, like the pope, wasn’t going to
come to Mark. But I was able to negotiate Mark a slot for a keynote speech
right before President Xi’s keynote speech and convince APEC to make the
“connectivity revolution” the theme. Even more important, I was able to

secure dressing rooms next to each other. This gives us the best opportunity
in years for Mark and Xi to meet. We game out different ways of making it
happen, rehearse multiple times what to say, and get to the venue
unreasonably early to give us as much time as possible to make the
connection. I’m primed and ready to be wingman again, only this time
without the mojitos.
When our security team lets us know that Xi is on his way, we move
outside our dressing room, into the cavernous event space, poised for our
“spontaneous” encounter. Mark braces himself—ready for one of the more
consequential moments of his career—as Xi’s security detail arrives. It’s a
phalanx of men, in identical gray uniforms, marching in formation past us.
Mark stares in disbelief, mouth open. They just keep coming, dozens and
dozens of them. It’s almost comical. Just when you think there could not be
any more, more step in.
As Xi approaches, the thick line of men moves into a formation. They
create an impenetrable dividing line between his dressing room and ours,
one that stretches all the way down the hall to the entrance. A human
Chinese wall.
President Xi is so obscured that he doesn’t even have to risk making eye
contact with Mark. The troops are now still and silent enough that we can
hear Xi’s footsteps as he goes by. Soon he’s safely ensconced in his
dressing room and the door is shut, and the human wall silently files out,
leaving Mark, me, and the rest of the small Facebook group loitering
outside the dressing room wondering what we just witnessed.
I find it hard not to admire Xi for so completely outmaneuvering us. The
Chinese clearly went to the organizers just like I did and asked, “Where will
the president be backstage? Who else will be around?” And when they
learned it would be Mark Zuckerberg, they took serious precautions. I’m
about to compliment their foresight and their sheer commitment—the boots
on the ground—that made that happen. I’ve never seen anything like it. But
then I realize Mark’s feelings are hurt. His pride is wounded. He’s not used
to people avoiding him so overtly.
“Uh, I guess that pull-aside isn’t going to happen,” he laments
awkwardly. No one knows what to say in response.

Mark gives his keynote. Hours later we head to a different stage, the one
where Mark will preside over a group of heads of state. We’ve scheduled
some time to head back and prepare in our bubble beforehand, but Mark has
no interest in doing that. Gone are the days where he would pepper me for
information about voting systems, term limits, agenda, and the motives of
presidents and prime ministers. We’re back to the early days when Mark
would tolerate no more than a sentence or two whispered to him before he
entered a room or a written briefing no longer than a text capable of being
read with one glance at his phone. Inside the Facebook bubble there’s a
constant churn of presidents, business executives, and continued election
fallout chat. No one is paying any attention to Diego Dzodan, Facebook’s
vice president of Latin America, who stays in close proximity waiting to be
noticed. I’d asked Diego to travel here from Brazil, partly because he’s our
most senior employee in the region, but mostly because he went to jail on
behalf of the company and he deserves some face time with the CEO. Like
meeting the Chinese, I see value in Mark grappling with the issues Diego
represents in person.
When Mark’s meeting room clears, I bring Diego in. I guess I’d been
expecting Mark to go over and greet him. It’s immediately clear that Mark
has no idea who Diego is. I introduce them and Diego gets the standard wan
smile. This poor guy had literally put his body on the line and gone to jail in
Brazil for Facebook, and Mark effectively blanks him until I remind him of
this fact. There’s then a supremely awkward exchange where Mark thanks
him in a stiff and perfunctory manner with none of the passion that was in
his “heartwarming” Facebook post. He doesn’t really want to take the time
to talk to Diego, and everyone can feel it.
Diego’s soon shuffled to the side in favor of some new crisis that
requires Elliot. Someone remembered that Ivanka Trump is scheduled to
present an award at the Breakthrough Prize, Mark’s award ceremony
designed to turn scientists into rockstars. Suddenly, after Trump’s election,
Mark doesn’t want her there, but no one knows how to disinvite her.
They’re gaming out different ways to get a message to her using some
combination of Yuri Milner, Jared Kushner’s brother, and Karlie Kloss, his
brother’s girlfriend. Diego returns to his corner.

When we arrive at the Grand Hall for the roundtable with presidents and
prime ministers, the first leader to approach us, fittingly, is New Zealand
prime minister John Key. So much has changed in the five years since Mark
stood outside his conference room and told me and John Key that he didn’t
want to meet John Key. So much has changed since the time when world
leaders made Mark scared and sweaty, since he doubted their relevance to
him or Facebook.
Key now tries to cut in as Mark and Elliot continue to discuss the
Facebook post about the election, and it seems to take Mark minutes to
register that John Key is speaking to him, not just mumbling beside him.
“What is he saying?” Mark asks me, while John Key continues to talk at
him, perhaps wanting me to translate his New Zealand accent into
American English.
“Tax, Mark. He wants you to pay tax in New Zealand.”
“Oh.” Mark nods blandly, and turns back to Elliot. The president of
Mexico joins our group.
“Have you met the president of Mexico?” I ask John Key.
“Enrique, Sarah, please,” President Peña Nieto chides, as he interrupts
John Key to get Mark’s attention. He’s double-booked for the session and
came by to personally apologize to Mark for missing it and to get a photo
with him. Canadian president Justin Trudeau approaches and also asks for a
photo, as does Australia’s prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull. It’s like
Mark’s a kingmaker, and they’re there to bend the knee.
I drag Mark into the Grand Hall for the session he will chair. It’s a vast
space, with large red screens reminiscent of the Chinese flag projecting the
APEC logo. In the middle of the room a circle of wooden tables has been
assembled, with microphones, chairs, and nameplates for each of the
presidents and prime ministers. At the center is Mark Zuckerberg. I sit
directly behind Mark, with Elliot perched beside me.
Once we’re settled in with all these heads of state, it’s surprising how
many are familiar faces. People I’ve met either with Mark or in my own
role. We know that many of the global leaders we’ve built relationships
with are coming to the end of their terms; some are already gone, and in
some cases we’ve already successfully transitioned to their successors. I’m

struck by the impermanence of importance. And yet Mark could
conceivably continue to hold his place chairing world leaders for another
fifty years. He’ll see these leaders off and the generations of leaders that
follow them. Like the queen.
After Mark’s opening remarks, I’m expecting a rough ride from the
assembled presidents and prime ministers. A few had told reporters they
saw the session as a chance for “confrontation with Mark Zuckerberg”
about taxes, misinformation, the decimation of local journalism, privacy,
and online harm to children. And that was all before Donald Trump was
elected with Facebook’s help. I am braced for a reckoning.
It is not a rough ride. It’s a bubble bath.
“How do we build the next Facebook in our country?” softballs a prime
minister.
“How does connectivity help in actual day-to-day governance? Why
should it be a priority for my government?” queries Michelle Bachelet,
president of Chile, one of the first to formally oppose Internet.org.
Before Mark has the opportunity to address this, the solicitous Canadian
prime minister Trudeau jumps in to explain how the internet can be used to
deliver social programs electronically, how there are productivity gains if
benefits can be paid directly into bank accounts without the need for going
to a bank, how social infrastructure is moving online. He’s repeating some
of the talking points we’d said to him in our chat before the session.
As other prime ministers and presidents intervene to show their tacit
support for Mark, I notice that the newly elected president of the
Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte—who credited Facebook with his election—is
conspicuously napping.
What’s odd is that no one raises Trump’s election and the role Facebook
played. But I belatedly realize it makes sense. These leaders are all in the
business of getting elected. They, like Elliot, Sheryl, and basically everyone
except Mark (although he seems to be changing his position), probably
believe Facebook was instrumental and they don’t want to piss off the guy
who made that happen. I’m sure that Trump’s election elevated Mark in
their eyes. He’s the powerbroker and they want to stay in power. They
understand that one of their most important assets—their voice—is political

capital that is ultimately controlled by Mark. So they spend the session
complimenting Mark and suggesting ways they can work together with
Facebook.
But Mark doesn’t seem to absorb it. As he sits in the chair leading this
conversation with heads of state, it’s like his mind is elsewhere. He seems
preoccupied and barely listening. When he does listen, he’ll turn to me and
ask me for the answer to the question and sometimes the question itself.
He’s phoning it in. Suddenly, I’m leading a Q&A with the leaders of the
free world. I can’t believe this is happening.
It’s strange. Instead of enjoying what should be the pinnacle of my
career, I’m also preoccupied. I spent so long trying to help Mark get
comfortable with presidents and prime ministers and get him operating as a
global player. Presiding over a room full of the most powerful people in the
world should have been a career highlight for both of us. But what I’m
seeing is that the more comfortable he gets, the less he cares. As his
importance compounds, his regard diminishes. He sails through the whole
session, presiding over some of the most powerful people in the world as if
none of it matters. Uninterested.
Obama hadn’t made it to the roundtable. When we told Mark he was
double-booked, Mark responded, “I guess it doesn’t matter, he’s a lame
duck anyway.” Which sounded like he didn’t care but we all knew better.
When we first started planning this trip to Peru, Mark was fixated on
traveling to Machu Picchu with President Obama as a “farewell road trip.”
As if I could just add in a presidential jaunt to one of the Seven Wonders of
the World on the side of a roundtable with the leaders of the free world.
Before I know it, Mark offers to leave his Zika control bubble and drive
across Lima to meet Obama.
We arrive at the Pontifical Catholic University of Peru, where Obama
was doing a town hall, one of his last international public events. After the
slick Facebook APEC pop-up, the place seems gargantuan and dilapidated,
buildings with peeling paint and rotting wood. With Obama soon to be out
of office and Mark fresh off chairing APEC’s heads of state, Mark
definitely has a little swagger on the way in. The power balance is shifting.

We’re not allowed to accompany Mark into the meeting. So a few of us
are loitering outside when Mark bursts out of the building and strides off
even angrier than he was at the start of the trip.
It’s a walk across the university campus to get back to where our vans
are parked. Mark is moving quickly, silently fuming. By the time we crowd
back into the van, he’s raging. There’s a scramble to fit us all back in, but
no one makes the usual “But, but, but … I’m the president of Guatemala”
joke. We had prepped him for a meeting that would focus on Obama’s
legacy, but we ended up with a meeting focused on Mark’s.
“Fake news, he kept going on about fake news and misinformation,”
Mark steams. “He doesn’t get it. He’s got it totally wrong, totally out of
proportion. He said that Facebook’s playing a destructive role globally. And
I think he actually believes that.”
Elliot shakes his head sympathetically.
“‘Not taking it seriously.’ That’s what he said. I’m not taking these
threats seriously enough.” Mark quivers, furious. “I told him fake news
wasn’t a big thing on Facebook. It’s less than one percent of what’s on the
platform. That it wasn’t fake news that swung the election for Trump. And
that realistically there’s not an easy solution. I mean, what does he want me
to do?”
Elliot agrees. “I think we’d very quickly run into free speech issues with
any action we take.”
“And you know what Obama’s focused on?” Mark says incredulously.
“The next election … already.”
“They’ve only just lost this one,” Elliot says.
“Yeah, he said he was ‘warning me’ that we need to make serious
changes or things are going to get worse in the next presidential race,”
Mark says.
“Warning me,” he repeats, incensed. Angry that Obama had taken him
to task on the role Facebook had played in the election and beyond.
Mark replays fragments of the conversation as if trying to beat them
into submission. He’s blindsided by Obama’s criticism and inflamed,
reiterating again and again how Obama’s a lame duck, as if that’s the salve

to the wound. But it seems to me that’s what allowed Obama to speak his
mind so freely.
Under his anger, I can tell Mark’s genuinely hurt. I think he likes and
respects Obama. He’s also completely unused to frank criticism from
anyone more powerful than him. There are so few who fit that description
anyway.

36
Rosebud
Mark broods for much of the flight. When he suggests a board game, I
agree to play explicitly on the condition that I don’t have to let him win. He
thinks I’m joking. When I trounce him at Ticket to Ride, he accuses me of
cheating. This irks me. I mean, I understand that he’s used to everyone
going easy on him, so it’s logical to him that anyone who beats him must be
cheating, but does he really think I wouldn’t be able to beat him fair and
square?
He challenges me to Settlers of Catan. A couple of other staffers join. I
win. He does it again.
“You definitely cheated that time,” he says loudly. I see members of the
team who are pretending to sleep covertly tune into what is happening. I
know he’s competitive and not used to losing, and he’s working out his
anger over Obama and being blamed for throwing the election results for an
entire country. But still.
“I didn’t cheat,” I hear myself say before I can stop myself. “And
actually, right up until that last move, you were going to win. You had
multiple ways to win.” I pause to demonstrate on the board the moves I
thought he was going to take or, more accurately, the moves I would have
taken in his position. I see him sit back, for the second time that day getting
some unexpected pushback (or the third, if you include Xi avoiding him), as
he takes in the different strategies I lay out.
“But this is like everything,” I say ill-advisedly. “You’re so focused on
winning every single battle you forget the war. You were so focused on

winning the longest road just then, you weren’t paying attention to the rest
of what was happening on the board.” I fail to stop. “Sometimes you have
to lose something to win the more important thing. If you try and win
everything, you end up losing. You could be strategic about giving some
things up. I mean, some people call it compromise, but if you don’t like that
word you can think about it as a ‘strategic loss’ or ‘strategic retreat’ or
whatever. But this is why we keep having massive issues. You’re so used to
being the winner who takes all.”
“An example,” he challenges me. “Give me an example.”
“Sure, there are too many to choose from.” I mean this with all my
heart. We seem to be in a constant can’t-see-the-forest-for-the-trees
situation. I think about Facebook’s refusal to cooperate in sharing even the
smallest amount of data with researchers or compromising just a little on
taxes or actually educating regulators about our products rather than taking
advantage of their lack of understanding of our technology. All of which
would build some trust and goodwill.
“Just pick one,” he presses.
“No problem. How about changing the name of Internet.org? How
many times did we have to come to you and say it was a problem and it was
going to attract regulatory scrutiny and make everything harder and it didn’t
need to? And how many times did you push back? You wanted to win that
battle so badly, and it’s just a name, and by the time you realized that and
actually agreed to call it Free Basics, it didn’t really matter. We’d burnt up
all the goodwill we had with regulators and they were against the whole
thing. If you’d just lost that battle upfront, accepted that regulators have
some actual real power, and accepted we needed to change the name, we
would have stood more of a chance of actually making Internet.org
happen.”
He leans back in his seat and considers this. There’s a tense silence. By
now, those who were pretending to doze to avoid the board games have
given up the pretense entirely. I’m filled with regret for having been goaded
into this confrontation and not showing the deference generally expected
from women who work for Mark, but the accusation of cheating pushed me
over the edge. Finally, he speaks slowly.

“That’s fair,” he says.
Nothing more. That’s the end of the conversation.
Instead, talk returns to legacy. It’s a familiar topic. Mark has become
increasingly obsessed by his own legacy in recent years. Things he can be
remembered for besides Facebook. This is what’s occupying him so much
of the time I’m around him, and fills his conversations, not new products he
wants to launch or new places he wants to drive Facebook. His foundation,
the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, launched less than a year ago.
“I want to talk about purpose,” he declares. “For the commencement
speech.” He’s giving the commencement speech at Harvard in a few
months, and he’s focused on that more than any Facebook issue or product.
In fact, for months he’s been raising this commencement speech. It seems to
be the only thing that brings him joy. The comms team staffers start taking
notes as he riffs on high-minded themes, global connection, and freedom.
This seems to cheer Mark up. By the time he brings up his personal
challenge, he’s having a great time.
Each year Mark does a public “personal challenge” that is heavily
promoted on Facebook. Previous years included learning Mandarin or
eating only meat he’s killed himself. This year, for his 2016 challenge, he’s
made an AI assistant for his home. To show it off at the end of the year, he
wants to put out a “humorous video” with the AI voiced by a celebrity. The
more he talks, the bigger the idea grows.
“We should do the video from my perspective,” he declares. “We’d need
to film it pretty fast. We’re nearly at the end of the year. It would be good to
do another video from…”
“Priscilla’s perspective?” Derick suggests.
“I was going to say the AI’s perspective, but that could be funny. Maybe
Priscilla would learn that the AI only listens to my voice. Like she’s trying
to command it in different places around the house and it just ignores her.”
I have thoughts on “Priscilla not having her voice heard” in her own
home but I know enough about expectations of women at Facebook to keep
silent. Mark thinks it’s hilarious.
“Maybe we can have users vote on who should be the AI’s voice?” he
says, eyes lighting up. The team keeps trying to lower his expectations,

given the tight deadline.
The conversation switches to what he’s going to announce for his 2017
challenge, which he wants to do soon. I’m only mildly curious about this.
Maybe he could focus on all the pressing problems confronting Facebook?
Do something about the way misinformation spreads, or the way populists
are using the platform, or how the two issues combine with authoritarian
and populist leaders using misinformation to trigger violence in the real
world, like in the Philippines? But it turns out he’s already decided.
“I know what my 2017 challenge is going to be,” he says firmly. “I’m
going to visit as many states as possible. Get on the ground. Meet people.
Understand what they’re looking for.”
My antenna goes up. Mark is not someone who particularly enjoys
travel or, in fact, people. And I know he’s hoping to have another baby in
2017, so this doesn’t make any sense as a personal challenge.
“Are there any states in particular you want to go to?” I ask tentatively.
“Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania.”
Ugh. The traditional stops for presidential candidates. Someone asks if
there’s a particular time he’s looking to go to those states and he responds
that he’d like to start as soon as possible. I can’t bring myself to ask
directly, “So you’re going to run for president?” Like saying the words will
bring it into existence. So I go instead with the only slightly more veiled,
“You’re not looking to go eat fried butter or whatever at the Iowa State
Fair?”
“Yes,” he pronounces. “I’m going to Iowa.” There’s a moment as this
sinks in. It feels as if all the air has been sucked out of the plane. “Can we
do that first?”
The comms team staffers start to quickly enable. Logistical questions:
How fast can they launch this tour, how many early-voting states can they
reasonably cover, what order, what do they do in each state, what
stakeholders do they need to reach out to, what images do they want to
convey? I keep trying to catch Elliot’s eye but he avoids me. I move to the
empty seat beside him.
“He can’t run for president,” I whisper when I think Mark is sufficiently
distracted. Elliot’s the one person on the plane with an air of fatherly

authority; he seems like the best person to quash this quickly. “Elliot, he
listens to you, he just told us he’s planning to run for president of the United
States. You have to stop this.”
Elliot shifts back in his seat and shakes his head.
“This is a horrible idea,” I press.
Elliot shrugs and says, “Mark gets to decide his own personal
challenges. It’s not for us to intervene, Sarah.”
I think he’s telling me to be quiet, to drop it, to know my place. And I
realize that everyone around Mark is like this. No one’s going to try to talk
him out of it.
Mark’s still bothered by the Facebook post Elliot made him write about
the election. He doesn’t want to move the company closer to the media
industry or allow it to assume more media-like functions, such as editing or
fact-checking.
Mark starts talking about how the lesson from the 2016 election is that
the mainstream media failed and blaming Facebook is just opportunism by
a media ecosystem that wants to scapegoat Facebook for its own failure,
and its own problems.
Talk turns to how he would solve it. He wants to remake the American
news media. What’s unsaid is that he already has remade the American
news media, by inserting Facebook at the center of it, driving down ad rates
for newspapers, and distributing their stories using their content to boost
time spent on Facebook. But I guess he wants more. Presumably more
control over the media would be helpful with any presidential run. He
doesn’t want to just buy a paper like other billionaires. Maybe Facebook
should buy Twitter? He’s tempted. After all, Facebook is already a news
source for nearly half of all Americans.
“Why are you guys recommending compromising with traditional
media? It’s an industry locked in a death spiral. We don’t need to
accommodate. You’re not thinking big enough,” Mark says, chiding Elliot
for pushing partnerships and profit-sharing models with media. Concessions
for the culprits. “You’re compromising with a dying industry rather than
dominating it. Crushing it.”

Mark has this will to survive above everybody, and it feels like he is
always plotting to kill off those things that get in his way to ensure his
survival.
“You don’t want to go to war with these guys,” Elliot says.
Mark disagrees. He doesn’t hide his frustration with Elliot as he
explains that the way digital technology is going will ultimately result in the
extinction of the media industry as we know it now. “The way I see it,
we’ve got three obvious options: I buy the ‘failing New York Times,’ the
paper of record, and remake the news ecosystem through that, but putting
Facebook at its heart. Make it truly digital. Fix it from the inside out. Make
it the first effective digital publication. The other option is to come at it the
other way to try and rebuild the fourth estate. I don’t buy a newspaper, I
make one. From the ground up. Hire engineers and journalists and rebuild it
at Facebook. Remake the entire news ecosystem here. Maybe I put in some
Chinese walls for independence or maybe I don’t.”
“Make it truly ‘digital first,’” Elliot ponders, absentmindedly playing
with the zipper on my portable breast pump case.
“Yes. Appoint a Facebook editor, but make something new. Not the
fourth estate, a fifth estate. But a fifth estate that has Facebook at its center.
You know—something that recognizes and grows the role Facebook plays
alongside these other power structures in society.”
“A digital fifth estate.” Elliot’s warming to it. “A home for everyone
now that we’ve removed these gatekeepers.”
“Or your option, this terrible status quo. Facebook continues on this
path of compromising around the edges with these failing media entities,
we continue to play an increasingly large role in controlling and directing
traffic and wait for them to die off over time. I don’t see what this gets us.
We’re just losing time.”
The sheer scale of the contemplated power grab silences us all. He’d
control how the news is made, as well as the algorithm that targets and
distributes it. What stays up and what doesn’t. Who is on the platform and
who isn’t. Which would certainly come in handy if he runs for president.
I try to piece together how we got to this point in the less than forty-
eight hours since we set off for Peru. What I settle on is this: Mark had no

intention of running for president when he arrived at the airport without his
passport. I think he really was blindsided by the accusation that Facebook
was responsible for Donald Trump winning the election, and his anger at
being blamed was real. But on the flight to Peru, as Elliot painstakingly
explained piece by piece how the Trump campaign used Facebook to win,
Mark became convinced that Facebook did play a decisive role. That
realization was forefront in his mind as he played at world leader at APEC,
chairing that bubble-bath session with all the prime ministers and
presidents, realizing the extent to which he and his platform truly were
kingmakers and how he would outlast almost everyone there. Sought after
for selfies by men who run countries. He already thought of himself as the
most well-known person of our generation in the world, and this experience
supercharged that belief. Obama’s dressing down provoked a “who does he
think he is” response in Mark, petulance rather than introspection, a desire
to flex power, not contrition. As Mark contemplated his future—his legacy
and the coming year’s personal challenge—I think he came to this dark
conclusion: if Trump can do it, so could he.
After all, not only does Mark now have Trump’s playbook, he owns the
tools and sets the rules. And he has something no one else has, the ability to
control the algorithm with zero transparency or oversight. The power to
control what Facebook users see. To throw someone like Trump off
Facebook. He already has his personal team “maximizing his reach and
engagement” or whatever euphemism is appropriate for whatever it is they
do. I assume they’re the reason he has four times more followers than
Trump and more than any other political leader in the world.
Also, he’s loaded. He could run for president and never ask anyone for a
dime.
Mark goes back to planning the various states he wants to visit. He
wants to go to a farm, a factory, a church, a community center. He wants to
meet with Black leaders, opioid addicts, autoworkers. He wants to eat fried
foods in Iowa and barbeque in Texas. He wants to go to a rodeo, drive some
heavy machinery, wear a hard hat.

The jet staff tell us to get ready to land. As I take my seat next to Mark and
the plane starts to descend, Mark asks me what I think. I feel my insides
tumbling. I want to tell him this is the beginning of the end for me. I had
fooled myself into thinking APEC might be some kind of reckoning. In fact,
it was the opposite. I’ve seen some hard truths I can’t unsee, about Mark
and where he’s going. This is the last foreign trip I invent for him, the last
time I travel with him. I’ve spent many years now, flying around the globe
and helping him learn how to navigate the world of prime ministers and
presidents. I don’t want this to become who I am. I didn’t sign up for where
he is now trying to go. I know I can’t do it anymore.
This trip is one of many moments where Mark could have gone a
different way. Could have been convinced by a different path. But
something else kicked in. After all the headlines saying he was in denial
about the election, after being shit on by Obama, he dug in. He’s not built to
take criticism like that and genuinely try to understand and fix the problems
the 2016 election exposed, wield his power responsibly. That’s not who he
is. He’s defiant. He’ll show them. And in the middle of all that, he stands on
a stage full of the most powerful people in the world, and they dote over
him like some boy king. All of that came together and solidified in this new
vision of himself that’s both comforting and sort of thrilling. He’d run for
the most powerful job on earth. If Facebook can propel someone into the
White House, why not him?
And now we’re sitting here side by side on a plane and he’s asked me
what I think. Where to even begin? Do I try to talk him out of this plan to
run for president? Do I point out all the ways it probably won’t make him
happy or end well for anyone? Do I tell him how he’s changed since first
met him? He was a single-minded maniac, sure, but it was all about
building something, making a tool to change the world. The way he saw
politicians back then—he had no time for them, would never want to be one
of them—I prefer that to the way he is now. Over these five years, I feel like
I’ve seen him face so many choices and lose touch with whatever
fundamental human decency he had when we started. Do I say that? How?
How can I say any of these things to him?

The plane is descending. Time’s running out. Here we are. Mark’s
looking at me expectantly. What do I think, he’s asked me.
I look him in the eyes, panic, and say, “Rosebud.”
Mark gives me a blank look.
“What are you talking about?”
“You know, Rooooosseeeebuuud.”
Mark looks baffled. Oh god. This was a very bad idea.
“Citizen Kane?”
Nothing from Mark.
“Citizen Kane. You know, the movie,” Elliot says. He’s sitting across
from Mark. We’re in a pod of four facing chairs. Strapped in for landing.
Still Mark doesn’t get it.
“Hearst,” I say, by way of explanation.
Mark cocks his head and looks at me quizzically.
Elliot clearly can’t believe I’ve gone down this road, but tries to help me
out. “I think what she’s saying is that if you do this and you control the
publishers and you run for office, that makes you a modern-day William
Randolph Hearst,” he explains. “You know, with the publishing and the
politics and the…”
“Oh,” Mark says softly. “Is that a bad thing?”
What a question. Neither of us takes that one on. Mark smiles wanly,
still confused, but shakes it off as the plane touches down on the runway.
We’re back on the tarmac, where we were forty-eight hours before.
Everything’s the same but everything’s different.
“Good trip, everyone. Lots to think about,” he says.
We all unbuckle our seatbelts and wait for him to go. After he exits, we
gather our things and leave the plane ourselves.

37
Man of the People
In the months that follow, Mark sets out on a road trip through the small
towns of Iowa; works a Ford assembly line outside Detroit, Michigan;
celebrates Pride in Omaha, Nebraska; attends Sunday service at Emanuel
African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston, South Carolina; drives
a tractor at a dairy and beef cattle ranch in Blanchardville, Wisconsin; visits
a shrimp boat in Bayou La Batre, Alabama; does NASCAR ride-along laps
with Dale Earnhardt Jr. in Charlotte, North Carolina; sits with a group of
recovering heroin addicts in Dayton, Ohio; and tours a drilling rig at one of
the main fracking sites in Williston, North Dakota.
Each stop is carefully scouted by an advance team. And then beautifully
documented by one of Mark’s photographers, including Charles
Ommanney, whose job for nine years was photographing George W. Bush
and Barack Obama. The results of these efforts are posted to Mark’s
Facebook page and then “optimized” to ensure his many millions of
followers see them. Mark’s also started to optimize himself, eschewing the
fatty fast foods for fresh cut fruit and putting time into working out every
day.
Officially he denies he’s running for president, but what else is this very
time-consuming side hustle? Why the focus on battleground states? He
hires the consultants who got Obama and Bush elected—David Plouffe and
Ken Mehlman—to his foundation. He publishes a six-thousand-word
manifesto full of global aspirations.

His speeches take on a new tone, like what a kid thinks a president
sounds like:
Our greatest opportunities are now global—like spreading
prosperity and freedom, promoting peace and understanding, lifting
people out of poverty and accelerating science. Our greatest
challenges also need global responses—like ending terrorism,
fighting climate change and preventing pandemics. Progress now
requires humanity coming together not just as cities or nations but
also as a global community.
And,
The occasion is piled high with difficulty, and we must rise with the
occasion. As our case is new, so we must think anew, act anew.
If I had any doubts about Mark’s intention to become a presidential
candidate, his response to some bad press in Hawaii wipes them away.
Mark owns a lot of land in Hawaii. He started with seven hundred acres of
beachfront property in Kauai. Then he launched lawsuits against hundreds
of Hawaiians who may have held titles to small plots on his estate, under an
old Hawaiian law, to force them to sell their land to him. Many do not wish
to sell. Mark was doing all this quietly, through three shell companies, but
then the fact that he owned the companies was revealed by the Honolulu
Star-Advertiser. “This is the face of neocolonialism,” a law professor
pronounces in one of the articles. The Vanity Fair headline reads, “Man of
the People Mark Zuckerberg Sues to Keep Native Hawaiians Off His Kauai
Estate.” An Inertia editorial says, “So now it looks as though not only is
Zuckerberg suing a bunch of native Hawaiians over land that’s been in their
families for generations, but he’s suing DEAD people. What a dick move!”
This is the sort of media coverage that months ago Mark would have
brushed off. I’ve seen him weather all sorts of bad press, going back years,
and he never seemed to care. But now he’s on the phone to Elliot, all
worked up. I overhear them. Mark tells Elliot to do something about the
headlines and Elliot explains that would be difficult because they seem to

be true. (Ha!) Then Mark declares he’s just going to get rid of the entire
estate, sell everything he has in Hawaii. He just wants to make this go away.
Elliot’s confident he’ll change his mind; Mark’s not used to giving up on
things he wants. He’s never okay losing any battle, and he cares way more
about his home in Hawaii than he does about Settlers of Catan or Ticket to
Ride.
Sure enough, within days he’s found a workaround. He officially
announces that he’s dropping the lawsuits, and Elliot tells me they have a
plan. Later I learn that a retired professor has purchased the disputed land
from his own cousins for millions of dollars. He openly brags of being paid
$6,000 a month by Mark Zuckerberg to do the deals and keep people off the
land, the cousins tell reporters.
So the attempt to quash the bad press is not entirely successful. But he
tried. Over the years, I’ve seen Mark take a lot of criticism, but I’ve never
seen him so concerned about how he’s being seen by the public. Just like,
you know, a politician.
He also has Facebook’s board approve a new stock structure that would
allow him to run for office. The filing with the Securities and Exchange
Commission expressly allows Mark to leave Facebook for up to two years
without losing control of the company if his absence is “in connection with
his serving in a government position or office.” I assume the two years
would cover the period Mark would be taking on the—presumably time-
consuming—endeavor of campaigning to be president of the United States.
Then, if he won, he’d step down as CEO. A lawsuit subsequently reveals
that some of Facebook’s board members were concerned about the time
commitment of this side gig and told Mark they were struggling with “how
to define the gov’t service thing without freaking out shareholders that you
are losing commitment,” but Mark fought hard and won. He’s wedded to
his plan. The day the special committee recommended that Facebook’s
board approve the new system, according to court documents, board
member Marc Andreessen texted Mark, “The cat’s in the bag and the bag’s
in the river.”
Mark replied, “Does that mean the cat’s dead?”
Andreessen answered, “Mission accomplished,” adding a smiley face.

And while Mark continues to look at other jobs, so do I. Calling people
I know, having conversations about positions at Google, Cloudflare, and
think tanks. Nothing solidifies and I can’t quit Facebook without a place to
go, because I need the health insurance. In the year since Xanthe’s birth, my
medical situation has gotten pretty frightening. My body is producing
precancerous growths in my bowel. Doctors cut them out, but as soon as
they do, more form. I had twelve growths cut out soon after Sasha’s birth.
But still they continue to grow. This shouldn’t be happening to someone my
age, they tell me, but they really don’t understand what’s causing it. I
wonder if this is some kind of legacy from my shark attack, because the
shark ripped through my bowel, but the doctors say no.
My doctors send me to a “genetic counselor” who says that it appears I
have something called Lynch syndrome. I’ll need some more tests to
confirm but I’m told that if they don’t remove my bowel, I’ll get bowel
cancer. I’m given pamphlets that start,
A diagnosis of cancer raises complex emotions and questions.
Among these are questions such as “What caused my cancer? Will I
have to face cancer again? Are my family members at increased risk
of cancer?”
The way the specialists speak so casually of the likelihood of cancer
makes living without health insurance inconceivable, especially with two
children.

38
Let Them Eat Cake
The day Donald Trump is inaugurated, I’m flying home from Davos with
Sheryl, Elliot, Sadie, and other Facebook staffers.
By now, Tom has a spreadsheet. Every time I announce I have to leave
him and the girls for another work trip, he says, “Well this is going in the
spreadsheet,” in a determined way before conspicuously updating it. He
never tells me what the spreadsheet is for or what happens if there are too
many entries. But I know it won’t be good. To make matters worse, he’s
concerned by everything going on within Facebook, but can’t report on it at
his newspaper because of the conflict of interest obligations he’s under.
He’s set a deadline for leaving San Francisco, which we both know really
means leaving Facebook, but with the ongoing health stuff, the incessant
work, and the tiny children, I’m finding it hard to make the time to figure
out a way out and still deliver what everyone needs day-to-day.
Thankfully, Davos has become routine. The hardest part these days is
managing Sheryl’s ever-increasing desire to be in the spotlight. After
months of negotiations, I’d secured a lineup she was satisfied with, making
sure she was on the right panels, went to the right parties, and had more
time with the microphone than her female frenemies. All of us
accompanying Sheryl are well trained enough to know Sheryl’s expectation
that we sit in the front row, applaud loudly, and provide admiring feedback
on her words or, as I’ve come to think of them, her emperor’s clothes. Any
deviation from this risks her chewing you out after.

But on this trip, I decide I won’t sit in the front row and won’t praise her
after each event. It’s one of my tiny acts of resistance. It feels rebellious. I
know it aggravates her. Autonomy disturbs a certain kind of powerful
person, and Sheryl has never accepted independence among her advisers.
Even those she is icing out. Her team races to be the first to craft
complimentary comments on her Facebook posts even after we’ve drafted
them ourselves, to share any positive feedback from “important people”
after a public appearance, and to be as obsequious as possible about her
events. It creates a strange reality around her.
And so I’m surprised at this 2017 Davos when—during Sheryl’s final
panel—some of her closest advisers start a WhatsApp group while sitting in
the front row to complain about how bored they are and include me. They
joke about livening up the panel by asking about filter bubbles or
Facebook’s role in news monetization and the other hot-button issues for
Facebook right now. Then they turn to criticizing Sheryl, her scowl, how
she always pivots to the same three inane anecdotes about people using
Facebook, including an Indian small business called Pigtails and Pony. It’s
jarring because these are some of her most trusted lieutenants, her most
obsequious cheerleaders.
Afterward, they rush up to her, quick to heap praise, telling her how she
eclipsed Christine Lagarde, Meg Whitman, and the other panelists.
Over the time I’ve been at Facebook, I’ve watched people who disagree
with Sheryl and Mark become marginalized and exit. The people who
enable remain and Sheryl rewards them with an astonishing amount of
money. Perhaps I was expecting some kind of honor among thieves. I didn’t
realize that they do say what they think, just not to her.
That’s another thing that’s weighing on me, the money. Like most tech
companies, Facebook offers equity grants. And since the time I joined pre-
IPO, these have become seriously valuable. My bosses earn astonishing
amounts of money, the sort of money that ensures they will never need to
work again. My equity grants are definitely not at that level (probably
because I didn’t know what equity was when I started at Facebook and so
never negotiated or asked for more), but after years at Facebook they are
worth serious money. Potentially millions of dollars. Meted out over four-

year cycles. But only if I stay at the company. That’s hard to grapple with as
the main earner in our household. Leaving could potentially mean losing all
of that.
Maybe that’s why they do it. Either way, open dissent isn’t an option
with Sheryl. People actively hide bad news or situations they know she
won’t like because they’ve seen her shoot the messenger.
Unfortunately for Sheryl, Facebook is generating a lot of bad news.
Elliot and Joel are quick to tell me that I shouldn’t mention these things to
her, whether it’s the fact we still haven’t resolved the issue that led to her
arrest warrant in Seoul years ago or we still haven’t found a way to launch
Facebook for kids—“Project Family.” No one wants to get shot.
We’re in Sheryl’s private jet flying home from Davos. It’s my first time on a
plane with her since the flight—one year ago—where she asked me to bed
with her. She’s been chilly with me since then. I’ve worked with her a lot
less, and every interaction feels loaded.
Soon after takeoff, she approaches the younger women—Sadie, me, and
another one of her assistants—inviting us to the bedroom at the back of the
jet. At first, none of us respond. Then, strangely, Elliot says he wouldn’t
mind a nap. What is he doing? Anything seems possible, including that he
just wants a nap.
Sheryl calls Sadie over. They whisper for a bit, then Sadie comes back
to me and confides that Sheryl finds Elliot “creepy,” before tidying up her
stuff, closing her computer, and going back to the bedroom with Sheryl.
She’s calling Elliot creepy while asking her subordinates to go to bed
with her?
While we work, extraordinary scenes are unfolding at Donald Trump’s
inauguration in Washington, DC. Hundreds of thousands of women in the
streets protesting there, with many more in hundreds of cities around the
country, the largest single-day demonstration in US history. And it all
started with a Facebook post.

When Sheryl emerges from the bedroom hours later, I’m excited to fill
her in on the largest women’s protest in our lifetimes. She’s fresh off a
Davos panel about women’s leadership where Elliot called her the
“unofficial self-appointed world dean of women.”
Sheryl picks over some fresh cut fruit that’s been arranged for her, still
in her pajamas, which are silky and perfectly tailored. I breathlessly start to
tell her about the history she missed while she slept. She looks bored
immediately. I press on about the Women’s March, how people are
marching everywhere, tiny towns, red states and blue, and not just in
America. She cuts me off, changing the subject to her weekend plans,
meeting up with friends, the possibility of going dancing sometime in the
future, redecorating her ski house, something about her apartment in Los
Angeles, and some story about her boyfriend Bobby and how he’s trying to
buy a private jet or staff for a private jet or something. She seemingly could
not care less.
Sadie passes champagne and cake around this private jet. One of
Sheryl’s three assistants arranged this to toast a “successful Davos.” Sadie
used to work at the Lean In organization, and I try to enlist her help in
getting Sheryl to show some interest in the Women’s March.
Sadie starts in with, “Don’t you think it’s amazing?” when Sheryl shuts
her down. She’s not even a little bit curious.
“You’re gonna come dancing with us, aren’t you, Sadie?”
Sadie gives me a look that tells me to drop it. There’s silence while
Sheryl sips her champagne and picks at the cake.
“What was she wearing?” Sheryl asks. I’m so relieved that she’s
engaging that I don’t totally understand the question. I start to tell her about
the pink hats that are showing up in marches all around the world. Sadie’s
making eyes at me to stop.
“No, no, not that,” she scolds. “What did Melania wear?”
Here she is on her private jet, champagne in her hand, her back to a big-
screen TV showing thousands of women with signs and banners. It takes all
my self-control not to exclaim, “Let them eat cake!”
“I don’t know,” I answer. It had not occurred to me to look at what
Melania Trump was wearing.

“Sadie, will you find out?” she says.
I retreat to the back of the jet and stay silent for the rest of the flight
home.

39
Facebook Feminist Fight Club
It turns out I’m not the only one who noticed Sheryl’s silence on the
Women’s March. Far from it. Nearly two hundred female employees who
work under Sheryl have recently created a secret Facebook group, the
Feminist Fight Club (FFC).
The existence of the FFC is a relief. I’m not alone. Unhappy workplaces
are conspiracies of silence. But once you get outside the sycophantic
leadership bubble, this place is roiling with discontent. The ethos of
Facebook, like America, is one of rugged individualism right down to the
product, which personalizes, atomizes, and weaponizes despite being based
on community and networks. Similarly, Lean In is premised on personal
responsibility in the face of structural issues. But the FFC is different. And
how stupid of me to think I was alone in this. I’m working with incredibly
smart people who are facing the same systemic issues I am. Of course, there
is some form of group or collective. In this one, you can watch its members
try to reconcile the Facebook they hoped for and the Facebook they
experience.
The FFC manages to make enough noise on women’s issues that
management is forced to respond, and naturally they do this in the most
Facebook way possible. They announce #ally bot, a “bot that promotes ally
behaviors within the company by letting you thank your colleagues for
being allies.” A top aide for the chief technology officer explains that the
bot is for men to use when they see other men supporting women. “If I’m in
a meeting and I see another dude be an ally I could say ‘hey that was great

keep that up.’” The bot “gives the recipient a shiny new Ally badge on their
internal Facebook profile” once their name has been added with the hashtag
#ally in the #ally bot.
The bot keeps score and is linked to the performance review system—
meaning men will be receiving a highly visible input to the system that will
affect pay, promotions, and stock options and can be easily gamed by any
men who decide to hand each other #ally hashtags. When the FFC figures
this out—how it’s intended to incentivize and reward men and not women
—the comments pick up a tone of incredulity and despair. One woman
posts, “Doesn’t it seem like this is an undue amount of credit for men who
are hitting the bare minimum of decency?”
“You don’t get a cookie for not being a scumbag,” another FFC member
writes.
“Where’s my ‘I got sexually harassed at work’ badge?” someone else
posts.
Thanks to the FFC, women are starting to talk more openly about the
harassment at Facebook. When I take a business trip to one of our overseas
offices, one of my coworkers pulls me aside as soon as I arrive. We’d
worked together for years and I’d noticed her cheerful personality change
when she was moved under a new boss, a balding pale man around the
same age as Joel. She closes the door and issues a quick warning about him,
her face reddening as she says, “Don’t be alone with him. Stick to the open-
plan office and don’t let him talk to you about sex stuff.” Later, the same
man begins an affair with a young coworker who wanted to join the team he
was leading. She subsequently left the company. He’s still there.
I know that an open office or even being thousands of miles apart won’t
spare anyone from having your boss “talk to you about sex stuff,” and
because of the FFC we know that this is happening office to office and in
between. I heard about incidents from Korea to India to Australia to
California and beyond. The worst of which involved hospitals and police
reports, coupled with prepared statements that “Facebook takes these issues
seriously.” The bulk of the rest protected by a silence. A silence born of the

knowledge of what happens to those women who speak up beyond these
urgent whispered warnings. It doesn’t help them advance, let’s just say.
That’s why these whispered warnings have developed. The belief that the
people who do this will be protected is part of what enables powerful
people to go on abusing that power. There’s a growing realization among
the FFC that we’re going to be saved not by the captains of Facebook but
by the crew. If we’re going to be saved at all, that is.
I decide I have to do something about how Joel is making me feel. I’m
hearing so many stories from other women about complaints they have
made. I am concerned that others may have complained about Joel and that
my silence would also impact them and ensure nothing changes. I can’t do
nothing. I want to be able to do my job without having to google “dirty
sanchez.”
I decide to talk to Elliot. I know HR will just protect Joel. Mark’s out
running for president. And Sheryl, who advocates for women in the
workplace day after day, in bestselling books, TED talks, and panels around
the world? I remember her once writing in a message,
I always believe that when companies and people have to say things
over and over it is because they want them to be true but they are
not. When I was at McKinsey, they always said they were “non-
hierarchical” because they were so hierarchical. Google is “not
political.” One of our favorite candidates who almost joined us was
“highly ethical.”
So that’s obviously complicated.
I tell Elliot about Joel’s behavior, Joel’s scheduling meetings and work for
me during maternity leave, and the systemic problems of sexual harassment
across his department. Elliot seems both unsurprised and unconcerned. He
listens to me, nods along, says next to nothing. When I’m done talking, he
tells me he’s sure all of this is solvable and will work itself out. And the
meeting’s over. He couldn’t make it clearer that he doesn’t want any part of
this. I rise and walk to the door. Elliot starts typing on his laptop.

“And if it doesn’t work itself out?” I ask.
Elliot looks up from his laptop and stares me straight in the eyes. “Well,
that would be a shame, but I’d be happy to write you a reference.”
It lands like a physical blow.
Weeks pass, and I worry Elliot’s going to fire me at any moment. Then I
spot another way I can take action. Separate from all this, Facebook’s
lawyers are looking into some things Facebook’s doing in the Philippines
after I raised concerns about whether the company violated the Foreign
Corrupt Practices Act. During that investigation, I realize there’s an
opportunity to put some things on the record, with company lawyers. Just in
case I am fired.
I tell them about Joel’s behavior and the fact that he made me work
during maternity leave. I tell them I’ve informed Elliot.
Within days, one of Joel’s team invites me out for a drink. This person
is often Joel’s mouthpiece so the invitation scares me, but I decide to say
yes, understanding that a message is going to be delivered to me one way or
another. We meet at a bar not far from where I live. It doesn’t take long to
get to the point.
“How’s the investigation going?” they ask casually.
Since the investigation is supposed to be strictly confidential, I play
dumb, hoping my poker face comes through for me.
Undeterred, they say, “Joel is loyal to his people. He looks after them.
He’s a marine. He values loyalty.”
The message seems to be: Joel won’t fire me if I keep my mouth shut.
Days later, the person running the investigation asks me what I want
them to do about Joel. Do I want the investigator to look into the issues
related to Joel that I put on record? I’m surprised at the question, because I
naively assume that if Facebook’s lawyers are aware of his behavior, they’d
have some sort of protocol that would tell them whether they have to
investigate. They wouldn’t be asking me.
Before responding to the investigator, I go back to Elliot. I ask him
directly: If I shut down this investigation right now, then Joel’s creepy

behavior will stop? He nods yes.
I go back to the investigator and tell him that Joel sent a message about
the investigation and the importance of “loyalty” and “looking after people
who are loyal,” and for that reason, if it’s up to me, I do not wish to trigger
an investigation.
It feels like retaliation from Joel begins almost immediately. He informs
me that he’s halving my job. I can choose between running Asia or Latin
America, but no longer both. There’s no explanation given, other than that
he has made a decision, although it is obvious to me.
Of the two options, there’s no question which one has more
responsibility, growth, and importance for the business. It’s Asia. But Joel
insists that if I pick Asia, I have to run China as part of the job. He knows
how strongly I oppose Facebook’s China policy and that I don’t want
anything to do with it.
I can’t bring myself to work on China. I shock Joel and Elliot by
choosing to run Latin America and Canada. It’s less responsibility and
importance.
This surprises them. They really had expected me to take on China.
They want to force me to submit. They counter that they’ll only give me the
smaller job if I lead the search to find someone to run Asia. So, for the time
being, I continue to run Asia.
The real kicker, though, is China. Even in this interim period, they insist
that I work on China.

40
Greetings from Beijing
In the past, when I expressed dissent about what Facebook was attempting
in China, I was removed from the China team. Now, in a totalitarian move I
suspect the Chinese leadership would admire, as a result of dissent in other
areas, I am being installed to run it, against my will. A test of loyalty to the
regime.
China has always been first in the “things I don’t want to know” about
Facebook. I’d rather not know the worst about this place I’ve devoted so
many years of my life to. My plan is to hire someone and get out of
Facebook.
It’s January 2017. Only weeks since Mark’s trip to Peru and his decision
to start his US political tour. Joel, Mark, and Vaughan all travel back and
forth between the US and Beijing and have been doing so for years. Joel
would send emails titled “Greetings from Beijing.” I didn’t pay much
attention. Other than moments that make the news, like when Mark went
for a smoggy jog through Tiananmen Square and posted about it.
I know Facebook’s advertising business in China is growing—even
while we’re blocked—because Chinese businesses are buying ads on
Facebook. It’s possible, through resellers, for them to target ads to people
outside China and to people who travel to China. In fact, China is
Facebook’s second-largest market, accounting for an estimated $5 billion of
revenue at this time and roughly 10 percent of Facebook’s total revenue,
trailing only the US. That’s while the company is banned. So I know China
matters a great deal to Facebook.

But as I take over the day-to-day running of Facebook’s China policy
from Joel, their strategy is so opaque, there’s no obvious place to find out
what’s happened so far. After a not terribly informative coffee with
Vaughan, I figure my only option is to sift through random documents to try
to understand the situation.
So I sit down to read.
In the three years since Mark sent out his email to top managers
declaring that getting into China was Facebook’s top priority, his desire to
make this happen has only grown, according to the documents.
To make it happen, Facebook’s put important people on the payroll,
including a former deputy secretary of the treasury, Bob Kimmitt, who’s
now the lead “independent” director on Facebook’s board. Mark gets advice
from Henry Kissinger and Hank Paulson.
I’m curious—why would China allow Facebook in? I soon find a set of
documents that sets out Facebook’s pitch. The first is titled “China—Our
Value Proposition.” It’s mostly the corporate feel-good “we’ll boost your
economy and help you prosper” bullshit. They promise to help China
increase its global influence and promote “the China dream,” support
innovation and job growth, and advertise Chinese products to people around
the world.
But the “key”offer is that Facebook will help China “promote safe and
secure social order.” And what does this mean? Surveillance. They point
out that on Facebook, the profiles represent real people with their real
names, and that “we adhere to local laws wherever we operate and develop
close relationships with law enforcement and governments.”
In the most benign reading of this, Facebook is saying: millions of your
citizens will post information about themselves publicly that you can view
and collect if you want. In the least benign reading—the way I read this—
Facebook is dangling the possibility that it’ll give China special access to
users’ data. Authoritarian states need information on everyone at every level
of society, and Facebook can provide a treasure trove.
That pitch signals Facebook’s intent to work hand-in-glove with the
CCP to help enforce its will on its people:

Facebook seeks to create an online environment that is civilized,
which is why we respect local laws as well as harmonious which is
why we remove offending content. We agree with Minister Lu Wei
when he said: “We must stick to the bottom line and exercise
governance in accordance with the law” and “Liberty means order.
The two are closely linked.… Liberty cannot exist without order.”
I can’t imagine Mark saying that to US citizens.
And who will do this surveillance on Facebook in China? Who’ll be
responsible for going through user posts and private messages looking for
each and every piece of content that the Chinese government wants
removed and expunging it? Does this include private messages between
Americans and Chinese citizens? Who will use Facebook’s technology to
search for faces at the government’s request? Who’ll turn those people in?
Be accountable to the CCP? Who gets their hands dirty? The stakes of this
are grim. Support for banned opinions can lead to harassment and arrest and
worse.
Facebook can take instructions from the Chinese government and do
this surveillance on its own users. Or a Chinese company can do it, in some
sort of joint venture with Facebook supplying the technology? I soon find a
document where our China team weighs the pros and cons of Facebook
doing this itself.
On the pro side, Facebook’s leadership believe they would have more
direct communication with the government, there’d be simpler coordination
since they wouldn’t have to deal with a business partner, and Facebook
would own more of the China operation. This is something that’s important
to Mark because he doesn’t want to give away equity or ownership for his
China operation if he can avoid it.
The con side is more complicated. They list several:
“Govt may be less forthcoming in its communication to us” [than
to a Chinese partner]

“increased human rights, media and public condemnation for
censorship and user data practices”
“Congress may demand visibility into content moderation
requirements” [in other words, US lawmakers might want to
know what’s on the blacklist of things the Chinese government
won’t allow on Facebook]
“More leverage for other Govts seeking similar treatment”
But the thing that gets me is where Facebook’s leadership states that one
of the “cons” of Facebook being the one who’s accountable for content
moderation is this:
“Facebook employees will be responsible for user data responses
that could lead to death, torture and incarceration.”
Which seems bad but somehow keeps getting worse. In the edit notes, I
see that Joel has edited out the part about death, torture, and incarceration
and replaced it in the final document, so instead it reads,
“Facebook employees will be responsible for directly responding
to requests for data from a government that does not respect
international standards for human rights.”
And yet, despite the fact that our employees would be responsible for
death, torture, and incarceration (however Joel might want to word it), the
consensus among Mark and the Facebook leaders was that this was what
they’d prefer:
We’d prefer more content/data control and communication with the
Govt over the limited protections we’d gain from being able to say
that our partner is responsible for taking down controversial content
and responding to Govt requests for user data.
Ugh.
I knew that Facebook’s leadership could be utterly indifferent to the
consequences of their decisions, but it never occurred to me that it would go

this far.

41
Our Chinese Partner
Aldrin” was the code name given to the project to get into China. They
named it for Buzz Aldrin, the astronaut who landed the first manned
spacecraft on the moon. After the Chinese government decided that
Facebook needed a Chinese partner if it wanted to operate in China, Hony
Capital, a Chinese private equity firm, was brought in and given the code
name “Jupiter.”
Hony would store all Chinese user data in China and Hony would
establish a content moderation team that would be responsible for working
with the Chinese government. That team would censor a blacklist of banned
content and deliver user data that the Chinese government requested. Hony
would monitor all the content in China, with the authority to remove that
content even if it did not originate in China. Facebook would build facial
recognition, photo tagging, and other moderation tools to facilitate Chinese
censorship. The tools would enable Hony and the Chinese government to
review all the public posts and private messages of Chinese users, including
messages they get from users outside China. This seems particularly
outrageous. What followed was years of exchanges and visits between
Facebook and Chinese representatives hashing out the particulars of facial
recognition, photo tagging, and other moderation tools. Briefings from
Facebook’s experts about artificial intelligence, virtual reality, and
augmented reality. Facebook invites Huawei—a company that’s widely
accused of being a tool of Chinese government surveillance—to join
Facebook’s Open Compute Project. Facebook offers to teach China about

internet infrastructure, so Chinese companies can compete better with US
firms like IBM and Cisco (Cisco’s the American company that built China’s
internet firewall).
Under direction from Mark, Facebook assembled a large team,
including some of its most senior and respected engineers, to work up what
the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) wanted. They start building new
censorship tools for Hony to use to scour through people’s messages and
posts and converting everything into simplified Chinese.
I find detailed content moderation and censorship tools. There would be
an emergency switch to block any specific region in China (like Xinjiang,
where the Uighurs are) from interacting with Chinese and non-Chinese
users. Also an “Extreme Emergency Content Switch” to remove viral
content originating inside or outside China “during times of potential
unrest, including significant anniversaries” (like the June 4 anniversary of
the Tiananmen Square pro-democracy protests and subsequent repression).
Their censorship tools would automatically examine any content with
more than ten thousand views by Chinese users. Once this “virality
counter” got built, the documents say that Facebook deployed it in Hong
Kong and Taiwan, where it’s been running on every post.
And there’s a draft letter for Mark to send to the head of the Cyberspace
Administration of China (CAC). In it, he’s solicitous:
We have already worked with the San Francisco Chinese Consulate
to take down terrorist sites that are potentially dangerous for China,
and we will be happy to work more closely with all of your
Embassies or consulates around the world to fight against terrorism
around the world.
What horrifies me is that the sorts of things that China considers
terrorist sites are human rights advocates or Uighurs or Falun Gong or
people supporting Tibet. The CCP even purchases Facebook advertisements
to spread propaganda designed to incite doubt about human rights
violations against the Uighurs. Facebook should not be allies in China’s war
against what it considers “terrorism.” I hope this letter was never sent.

At the other end of the scale, I find an email where a team member
admits that a lot of the censorship might be pretty petty:
How much and what types of Chinese user-generated content are we preventing the world
from seeing? Very likely, much of the relevant content not only does not violate our
Community Standards, but is not even illegal in China, just objectionable to the authorities
(e.g., names and commentary casting high party officials and their families in a bad light).
Breaking Facebook’s fundamentals on content is one thing; data is another.
As Vaughan writes to Elliot, “Filtering content is important, but having
server/data in China is even more important so the Chinese government
would be able to control/see it.”
From the start, the Facebook team agrees that Facebook will store
Chinese user data in China under their terms. When other countries have
asked for this—Russia, Indonesia, Brazil—Facebook has refused. I
personally had told presidents and officials at the highest level of
government that we would never do this, reproachfully adding that we only
locate our servers and data centers in countries where we believe the
government would never try to access them or seize them.
When it comes to the Chinese government getting access to all the data
in Facebook’s data warehouse, a report offers drily, “Note that this will
happen.” This is the kind of government access to user information that
we’d aggressively fought against providing to the US government, even
after receiving National Security Letters demanding it in specific cases.
When Edward Snowden revealed that the NSA had hacked into Facebook to
spy on its users in 2013, Mark called President Obama to express his
frustration over government surveillance and “the damage the government
is creating for all of our future.” He and Joel went to the White House to
meet with Obama about it, with Mark saying, “The government kind of
blew it on this. They were just way over the line.” Not long after, he was
offering a much better deal to the Chinese.
The infrastructure that underpins the internet is on such a big scale—
submarine cables, data centers—that it requires significant investment,
planning, and execution. When Facebook started its major projects to get
into China, it also started working with Google and a Chinese firm, Pacific
Light Data Communication, to build an undersea cable that would land in

China to support its Chinese operations. Facebook would be pioneering the
first undersea cable to directly connect China and the US. It was clear there
would be very significant risks that China would intercept this data. And not
just Facebook’s data. The cable was designed to carry a large chunk of all
internet traffic. It’s why no one else had ever connected the two countries in
this way. Facebook knew this and didn’t care. Well, more than that, they
wanted it for Mark’s number one priority: China. They invested serious
money building a data pipeline to China, a project the US government
blocked over concerns about the CCP’s access to data many years later.
One of Facebook’s few supposed red lines is that China will not get any
access to the data of users who are located outside China. But,
unsurprisingly, the documents tell a different story.
Facebook “will deploy Points of Presence (PoP) servers with the goal of
speeding up the experience for users in China.” Facebook has PoP servers
like this all over the world. Basically, they speed up service by bringing
data closer to users. As I understand it anyone outside of China who’s in
touch with someone in China could have their data stored on a PoP server.
Under Chinese law, the government could access those servers.
That wasn’t the only worry about non-Chinese user data being exposed
to the CCP. Another document, titled “Aldrin Security Risks,” outlines the
risks that the Chinese content moderators could feed data on non-Chinese
users to the government either directly or by sharing their credentials. This,
coupled with espionage reaching further into Facebook’s network, was a
real concern. Facebook’s leadership had been briefed on recent activity
attributed to Chinese espionage, including attempts to compromise the
corporate networks of WhatsApp and other messaging services. And
attempts to compromise Facebook account passwords, penetrate secret
groups, and install malware on mobile devices and desktop computers.
Facebook’s risk assessment experts say all those things are not just possible
but highly likely to happen.
The complicity with the Chinese government is so extensive that the team
concludes it’s highly likely that the US government will see the data

warehouse in China as a target for its own intelligence collection and
compromise it. I’m stunned at this. Facebook is working so closely with
China that now it’ll have its own government breaking into its systems as if
it were a foreign adversary? And that’s just a given of doing business, rather
than a serious red flag that you’re on the wrong path?
As I read through page after page, I see the sort of briefings that would
warm the hearts of every government I work with. We never share this type
of information, and believe me they’ve asked. But here are detailed
explanations of precisely how the technology functions, of algorithms and
photo tagging and facial recognition. All the secrets of the trade that I
thought would never be revealed to anyone outside Facebook. Facebook is
providing engineers to demonstrate, offering ideas on how to adapt the
settings to meet the Chinese government’s needs. It’s white-glove service
for the CCP.
The ugly fact is that these are many of the things Facebook has said are
simply impossible when Congress and its own government have asked—on
content, data sharing, privacy, censorship, and encryption—and yet its
leadership are handing them all to China on a silver platter.
They know none of this looks good. Facebook was so worried about a
leak, they wanted a contact at the CAC for “leak co-ordination.” Because
“if it leaks we won’t be able to keep doing what we’re doing.” One risk
assessment document contemplates how word might get out:
A disgruntled current or former employee leaks additional details
about how we are treating data to highlight differences in what we
say to the public vs what we do.
But what did they mean when they worried about highlighting
differences in what we say to the public versus what we do?

42
Respectfully, Senator
They needed a plan to deal with the problems they’d have if the world
found out about what they were doing in China. The problem was they
knew they couldn’t tell the full truth. And how to solve this conundrum in
difficult situations, like being questioned by Congress? That’s what makes
these documents so intriguing.
They got very close to launch. There’s a detailed rollout plan for
Facebook’s entry into China. It starts with the announcement of a Facebook
Representative Office in China, supported by a Nicholas Kristof column
they hoped to get him to write for the New York Times with a “simple and
modest argument”: internet is not going to change China, exposure to the
rest of the world will, and what we’re doing will contribute to that.
The Facebook team appears to be aware of how bad its plans for China
might look. So much so that when they worked up some hypothetical
headlines for what the news coverage might be, they included these gems:
“Chinese Government uses Facebook to spy on its citizens”
“Facebook hands over data on Chinese citizens to the Chinese
Government”
“Facebook grants backdoor access to Chinese user data”
“China now has access to all Facebook user data”
Worried about damaging Facebook’s brand with users, advertisers, and
lawmakers, they ran focus groups on these headlines and others, with

Facebook users in Atlanta, Phoenix, London, and Berlin. My favorite
finding in all of the consumer research decks was this:
“The idea that Facebook cares about people’s privacy is not
believable anywhere.”
Millions of dollars are siphoned into China launch efforts. There’s
money to give to groups who will be supportive, groups they want to fund
in order to “neutralize” organizations that might criticize Facebook like
Human Rights Watch, Reporters Without Borders, and Freedom House.
When the team asks Mark what he’d consider a successful launch in
China, he’s conservative:
If we look at one of the worst countries we’re performing in
(Russia), even getting 20% of the internet population in China will
equate to more users than Russia.
Congress would want to know what technological advances Facebook is
briefing the CCP on, what technological information has been transferred
since they first started secretly working together in 2014. China is
renowned for its development of homegrown copycat technologies.
Congress needs accurate information to develop regulations and policies on
national security and technology. The stakes are high. And Joel knows this.
That’s why he identified “managing opportunities in China with
consequences for brand, relationships with government and the Internet” as
one of the biggest challenges of his role.
To anticipate the reaction from Washington lawmakers, Joel’s team
work up a United States Impact Analysis. It warns that “it’s good politics
for members of Congress to be tough on China and to look like they’re
protecting ‘the more than 50% of each Member’s constituents who use
Facebook.’”
We should expect intense criticism on Capitol Hill and hearings in at
least the Foreign Affairs, Judiciary, Commerce, and Intelligence and

Homeland Security Committees, in both the House and the Senate,
as well as letters from multiple Members.
The team points out that “members of the intelligence community who
opposed us on surveillance reform will attack us for hypocrisy,” perhaps
remembering Mark’s outraged call to President Obama after the Snowden
leaks and his other protests about US government surveillance.
They’ll claim we rolled back US intelligence actions that were
privacy protected, and didn’t result in human rights abuses, but now
we are willing to hand data to the Chinese government if we can
profit off it.
With these criticisms and others in mind, Mark’s talking points were
prepared. He would argue, basically, “that our service in China operates
under the same constraints as other Chinese social media platforms.” The
Chinese users would know better than to post anything dangerous on
Facebook or anything they didn’t want the government to see.
Which may be true for some Chinese users. But who knows? It’s not
like Mark or Joel or Vaughan has spent enough time in China to know how
well people will censor themselves in their social media posts and private
messages to each other. And it misses a bigger problem. Totalitarian
regimes move the line on what’s admissible. Something that seems safe to
post on Facebook today—support for some idea or leader or book or
musician or movie—could change tomorrow or in a year and users would
pay the very steep price. Whatever we and they believe today may not be
the case tomorrow. There is no security for anyone to rely on in a regime
like this.
The goal for companies is, as I understand it, to answer the questions
Congress has without committing perjury. Mark prepares for the mock
congressional hearings, or “Murder Board sessions,” with questions he’s
likely to face. The questions are tough, and the team coaches him to
sidestep nearly every one. Even with this evasive approach, Vaughan is not
satisfied and instructs the team, “On balance, I think we should be less
emphatic about how clear our disclosures will be.”

The team’s advice is that Mark should not directly admit that Facebook
wrote the censorship software in collaboration with the Chinese Communist
Party.
Is it true that you’re writing, controlling, and applying the
censorship software?
i) No, that is not entirely accurate. Our partner, Jupiter, will
make decisions on content restrictions in accordance with Chinese
laws and obligations. [Jupiter is the code name for Hony Capital,
Facebook’s joint venture partner.]
ii) For the security of our users around the world and the
integrity of our service, Facebook will own the technology that
Jupiter will use to manage content review in China. This is the same
kind of technology we use to enforce our community standards
around the world.
It’s not the same kind of technology Facebook uses around the world.
The whole answer definitely feels like stretching the truth, given that
Community Standards around the world do not require a “Chief Editor” and
a staff of hundreds of people to enforce government censorship and protect
the families of leadership on software created by Facebook.
On this next question, Mark is to say that it’s not what he would prefer
but Facebook’s mission comes first.
Why are you willing to give the Chinese de facto bulk data access to
China user data, but you fight U.S. requests aggressively even where
the data might be needed to protect U.S. national security?
Facebook opposes bulk data access by any government.…
Although the law on this issue in China—as well as other countries
—is not what we would prefer, we believe in our mission of
building bridges and connecting people globally. To do that, we
offer our service in countries whose policies we sometimes find
objectionable.…

There are a number of questions gamed out about what Facebook will
do if China takes certain actions. For example, what if it demands code or
encryption keys? One question reads, “Do you have any ‘red lines’ you
won’t cross?” To all these questions, Mark is coached to say, basically,
Facebook will evaluate those things if and when they happen.
In response to the very pointed question, “How is this not providing a
gateway into your network and making your non-China user data more
vulnerable to hacking?” they suggest Mark stonewall. He’s to tell them that
the only data that’ll be stored in Chinese data warehouses will be that of
Chinese users, and that the Chinese won’t have access to the rest of
Facebook’s data. Which obviously ignores the whole issue of the access to
US and other citizens’ data on PoP servers. But if Congress says the specific
magic words and he’s asked directly, “Will any non-China user data be in
China?” he will concede and acknowledge the existence of the PoP servers:
Like most companies who operate a large global network
serving millions around the world, we use a variety of systems to
make our service faster, and some of these will be deployed in
China. As a result, there may be instances where some pieces of
content from non-China users are located on these systems for short
periods of time.
Or will he say this? Joel tags these bullet points in a comment, saying
first, “Not sure we need to say this yet”—meaning, maybe don’t admit this.
Then he leaves a comment, “For further discussion.” No one suggests
telling the truth, that his own security and legal experts have said that China
will have access to the PoP servers and there’s nothing Facebook will do to
protect US and other citizens from that.
There seems to be no compunction about misleading Congress.
Presumably because the team assumes they’ll never be caught out. Senators
will need to ask exceptionally specific questions to get close to any truth.
At one point, the team genuinely considers the possibility that the US
Congress will compare Facebook’s entry into China to being complicit with
the Nazis. If Mark is asked if he’s abetting crimes against humanity, he’s
basically supposed to say, “That hurts my feelings.”

How is this different from being complicit with the Nazis?
Respectfully, Senator, that is an unfair comparison and I resent
the implication that doing business in China is akin to abetting
crimes against humanity. China is one of the United States’ largest
trading partners and has lifted millions of its people out of poverty
and grown its economy quickly.
Mark is eventually asked about China in a Senate hearing in April 2018.
Senator Catherine Cortez Masto, a Democrat from Nevada, asks,
The Chinese government is unwilling to allow a social media
platform—foreign or domestic—to operate in China unless it agrees
to abide by Chinese law. First, a social media platform must agree to
censor content and conversations in line with directives from
China’s information authorities. And second, businesses that collect
data from Chinese individuals can only store that data in China
where, presumably, it would be easier for the Chinese government
to access, via legal means or otherwise. You’ve made no secret of
your desire to see Facebook available once again in China. Could
you please reveal to the Committee whether you are willing to agree
to either of these requirements?
Mark’s answer is mostly a lot of blahblahblah about how, because
Facebook is blocked in China, “we are not in a position to know exactly
how the government would seek to apply its laws and regulations” to the
platform. This is not true. The Chinese Communist Party has told them
exactly how it would apply its laws and regulations. And Facebook has
developed technology and tools to meet their requirements and tested them
together with the CCP. Then he says,
No decisions have been made around the conditions under which
any possible future service might be offered in China.
He lies.
After the congressional hearing Facebook’s stock price rises.


43
Move Fast and Break the Law
When Mark is asked by the China team how long Aldrin will be a priority
for Facebook, he says, “The longer we don’t get in, the more important it
becomes as a priority for the company as we knock out other hi-pri issues.”
I need to hire someone as fast as possible and then get out.
But who do you hire for this role? I struggle with this. Whoever steps
into this job will be the person working most closely with the Chinese
government contacts for anything related to Facebook. They’ll live in
China. Ideally, they’ll be a Chinese national.
One of the documents I found said that a risk with this project is that the
“Chinese government arrests a Facebook employee who has access to the
blacklist and is accused of sharing the list under the State Secrets Law.
Facebook employee spends the rest of their life in prison or worse.”
The person I’m supposed to hire is definitely at risk. Should I ask them
if they’re prepared for that? They’re leverage. And by now, I’ve seen
enough to know how little Mark weighs the interests of Facebook’s
incarcerated employees.
And I think even Vaughan gets where I’m at. I’m not even told when
Vaughan’s team does their regular meetings with the CAC to discuss
Facebook’s China entry, but I find the notes from these meetings later. The
official they’d been meeting with before everything blew up in 2015 is
gone. That man—Lu Wei—was the head of the CAC. Mark referred to him
as “our guy” and thought he’d be the one to get Facebook into China.
Vaughan told everyone Lu Wei had staked his career on the Facebook deal

and the Asia team said, “Minister Lu Wei is hanging his hat on this
endeavor just like Mark is and  … this decision will shape his career for
better or worse.” But Lu Wei abruptly stepped down in 2016. And was
imprisoned shortly after on corruption charges. The photo of Lu Wei
visiting Facebook’s headquarters and viewing President Xi’s book on
Mark’s desk was included in a lot of the state media coverage of his
downfall. This is the same book, The Governance of China, that Mark gave
to a number of his top lieutenants.
Apparently, Facebook wasted no time in resuming negotiations with the
new director of the CAC, Zhao Zeliang. As Sheryl framed it, the focus of
Facebook’s work at this time was strengthening “our government relations”
with the Chinese Communist Party. Detailed briefings with CCP officials on
the new tools it’s building for the Chinese Communist Party. Zhao wants to
know how Facebook will cooperate with the Chinese government to “arrest
bad people if Facebook can’t identify whether a person is good or bad.” In
this scenario, Facebook needs to “cooperate with the CAC to block content
from (not yet legally bad person) from showing up in the feed.” The team
sets to work on this, knowing that this content is probably just protecting
CCP officials and their families. Before long they are fulfilling Zhao’s
request to show that the censorship tool can do keyword and entity
blocking, part of the extensive testing the CCP is setting Facebook.
Zhao appears to be less of a fan of Facebook than Lu Wei, lecturing the
Facebook team that “since US election last year [2016], many say [the]
social networks especially Facebook influence [the] outcome with fake
news.” He tells the team that China is different from the United States and it
does not want unverified information sources to affect its political
processes.
Something he does want is: Guo Wengui. Guo is an exiled Chinese
billionaire businessman who became a political activist and frequently
criticizes the Chinese government. Zhao asks whether the content on Guo’s
Facebook page counts as fake news. If so, and if a complaint is made, will
measures be taken? He tells the China team there are people who don’t
want Facebook in China:

So we need to take measures and do more in such situations to
demonstrate we can address mutual interests.
He explains that Facebook needs to tell them what it can do about Guo,
and there are three possible responses:
1. There is nothing we can do
2. There is something we can do
3. We can do even more than expected
In case that is not clear enough, he states explicitly that if there’s
nothing Facebook can do about Guo’s page, it’ll “impact on our
cooperation,” but “if handled well, this can be a force to help our
cooperation.” Zhao explains that there are people who ask him why he is
pushing this deal with Facebook if Facebook can’t do anything about Guo.
The meeting notes then list three possible options:
1. Shut down the account
2. Block his content from Chinese users
3. For specific articles or video posts, if a Chinese organization
reports, can we remove or do anything?
Zhao tells the team about GitHub, a site with very active discussion
boards, owned by Microsoft. He tells them that he knows GitHub’s
leadership and when someone “started slandering” President Xi, the CAC
filed a report with the GitHub CEO, the content was removed, and GitHub
let them know it was because of their relationship with the Chinese
government.
I wondered why Zhao is even bothering to meet with Facebook. But in
this particular meeting, he says the quiet part out loud. Guo is not in their
control, and he is “just one example.” He explains,
Last year a BBC article said the most influential organization today
is not a newspaper or tv. Facebook is not just a technology platform.
The content on Facebook guides public discourse.

Later he elaborates,
Facebook is the most influential platform (or let’s say media) in the
world so China should have access.
For China, that’s the upside of continuing to actively negotiate with
Facebook for access to China. They get a lever they can pull on the “most
influential media in the world” to shut down the things they don’t like—
including the free speech of activists living abroad—and Facebook will do
its bidding. And with Guo, they are using the leverage they have created,
linking it directly to Facebook’s ability to enter China.
Facebook blocks Guo’s page in April 2017. I don’t hear about it till I
read it in the New York Times. Facebook doesn’t tell the Times about the
pressure—or the quid pro quo—from the head of the CAC. They explain
the shutdown of Guo’s account as an accidental act of God. Their story is
that it’s a random bug in the software that coincidentally struck exactly the
person China said would need to be suspended to help it’s “co-operation
with Facebook.” That is until the Times started asking questions:
A Facebook spokeswoman said that the company’s automated
systems had erroneously suspended Mr. Guo’s account and that once
the company was able to investigate the error, it had restored the
profile. The precise reason for the suspension would be difficult to
determine, the spokeswoman said, adding that publicizing the
reasons could allow others to manipulate the system.
Perhaps they were aiming for irony on the question of being public
about manipulation of the system.
The Times also notes, “Some Chinese activists have complained about
accounts being sporadically suspended on Facebook and other sites without
explanation.” Hmm.
On this occasion Guo’s account is restored within days.

Five months pass, and then Guo’s thrown off Facebook permanently in
September 2017. This happens around a week after China blocks WhatsApp
—one of Facebook’s most important bets for growth internationally. I know
the fundamental challenge that an important country blocking Facebook
presents to Mark. A member of the China team tells me the removal of Guo
from Facebook was Mark’s decision. He’d initially wanted a middle
ground, a temporary suspension, but given China’s demands and the stakes,
he ultimately decided to do the full suspension.
Weeks later, Facebook’s general counsel is asked under oath about
Facebook’s treatment of Guo’s account by the Senate Intelligence
Committee.
Senator Rubio: My question—so what I want to be clear is, was
there any pressure from the Chinese government to block his
account?
Colin Stretch: No, Senator. We reviewed a report on that account
and analyzed it through regular channels using our regular
procedures. The blocking was not of the account in its entirety, but I
believe was of specific posts that violated our policy.
Rubio tries again:
Senator Rubio: But you can testify today that you did not come
under pressure from the Chinese government or any of its
representatives, or people working for them, to block his account or
to block whatever it is you blocked?
Colin Stretch: I want to make sure I’m being precise and clear. We
did receive a report from representatives of the Chinese government
about the account. We analyzed that report as we would any other
and took action solely based on our policies.
This is not precise or clear. Facebook was under direct pressure from the
Chinese government. Told explicitly there would be a quid pro quo, that the
way they handled Guo would affect whether Facebook would be allowed
into China. The reports were not analyzed “as we would any other.” Actions

were not taken solely based on Facebook’s policies. China demanded
action. Raised Facebook’s China project. And Mark blinked. And blocked.
In May 2017, I’m told that Facebook has launched two apps in China. This
is surprising news because Facebook and its apps have not been licensed or
authorized to operate in China in any way, despite every effort from Mark
and the team. What’s more surprising is that the only reason I’m told about
this is that a New York Times reporter has somehow learned about these
apps and is preparing a story. I’m supposed to help the comms team figure
out what to say to him. When Vaughan lays out some facts in an email to us,
one of my favorite comms people writes just to me,
“Oh Jesus. I just read it. WTF am I supposed to do with THAT?”
For years, Facebook had tried and failed to get a Wholly Foreign-
Owned Entity (WFOE) license or a representative office that would allow
Facebook to operate in the country. Apparently, this is no deterrent to the
team. They created a shell company incorporated in Delaware named
Leaplock. Leaplock creates a subsidiary in China. They call it IvyCo after
Ivy Zhang, Facebook’s head of business development in China—who’s a
Chinese citizen and has only been working for the company a few months.
They obscure Ivy’s employment arrangement by taking her off of
Facebook’s payroll and making her an employee of a Chinese human
resources company. Neither Leaplock nor IvyCo has a WFOE or a
representative office. Officially, Ivy is the owner of IvyCo, and the only
employee of IvyCo.
Facebook takes two apps it has deployed around the world—Moments
and Flash—and makes minor adjustments to remove Facebook’s name from
everywhere in the apps and Terms of Service. Then it launches them in
China.
Moments is a photo-sharing program that is renamed Colorful Balloons
for China. Flash is Facebook’s Snapchat clone. They modify the logos of
the apps, but not very much despite Vaughan claiming these apps were
“designed for China.”

It’s unclear if they’re storing user data for these apps in China but I
doubt they are. Facebook already has a global infrastructure to serve
Moments and Flash. Moments gathers facial recognition data of all its
users, but there seems to have been no consideration about whether they’d
be turning this data over to the Chinese government if asked, or whether
they would censor content at the request of the Chinese government. If I’m
right about this, the level of illegality is staggering. It would mean that the
user data is stored on Facebook’s servers outside China, in violation of
Chinese law. And that Facebook has launched apps in China without any
disclosure to investors, employees, the Federal Trade Commission, or even
Congress, all of whom have taken a close interest and asked questions about
what Facebook is up to in China. Facebook keeps saying it is “studying and
learning about China,” not telling the truth that it is operating apps there.
As soon as I learn about all of this, I go straight to Joel, assuming he’s
unaware that this has happened. The series of decisions that led to such a
clownish attempt at subterfuge are incomprehensible to me. And I’m not
alone. I know that one of the senior lawyers at Facebook has flagged
concerns about the launch of apps in China. But Joel’s fine with it.
“Are Mark and Sheryl okay with it?” I ask.
He admits that they weren’t aware of it. I tell Joel that they need to
know. He tells Vaughan to write a memo for Mark and Sheryl. The draft
begins, “Over the past couple months we’ve quietly released Moments and
Flash in China.” Turns out these are not even the first apps we’ve launched
in China. Facebook has also released Boomerang, Layout, Hyperlapse, and
MSQRD. Again, in all cases they have completely hidden this.
I am surprised to read, “We’ve done this with the tacit approval and
encouragement of the CAC.” He also states,
The CAC unofficially and verbally recommended that we not use
the Facebook name, and that the distributor be a Chinese entity for
social apps. The CAC has implied that they want us to succeed—but
they don’t want the apps to attract undue public attention, and could
shut them down if that were the case.

Reading this I wonder if it’s true that the Chinese know about the apps;
it’s entirely possible they knew and are in cahoots with this subterfuge. But
it’s also completely plausible that the “tacit approval” from the CAC is the
barest possibly-lost-in-translation head nod from a random official. I like
Vaughan, but he can be a cowboy sometimes.
The memo to Mark and Sheryl gets delivered. In my regular weekly
meeting with Joel, I ask, “Has Vaughan been fired yet?” He tells me Mark
and Sheryl are fine with what Vaughan’s doing.
Of course they are.
The secret launch of Flash then becomes, in Vaughan’s words, “a
priority for Mark.” The way Mark sees it, “the biggest risk is that Facebook
gets stuck with a small business in China and all the costs outside China,”
so he’s aggressively pushing every lever to get in, no matter how dodgy.
The way Vaughan’s memo frames things, the big issue with these apps
isn’t the Chinese government but “critical media attention from the Western
press.” To be ready for this, the comms team puts together a plan.
This reactive comms plan is here in prep for the worst case scenario
when and if we have investigative journalists sniff out all the
information on the points below.
The plan starts with some possible headlines we might be facing when
the news breaks:
“Facebook sets up sketchy shell companies in an effort to get inside
China”
“Zuckerberg will stop at nothing to get into China. Inside the story
of the web of deceit that Facebook has spun to get a piece of the
world’s most lucrative market.”
“Facebook will do anything to get into China, except use the name
Facebook”
This is bad. It gets worse. As the New York Times reporter is about to
publish his story I learn two things: someone at Facebook is leaking to the

New York Times, and something is very wrong with the documentation used
to register the company that is launching the apps in China. I go straight to
Facebook’s lawyers. I explain that the New York Times has discovered that
the address used in the registration documents for this Moments/Colorful
Balloons app is fake. There’s no office there. And there’s a bigger issue
with the registration documents. IvyCo’s subsidiary Youge Internet
Technology, which is officially launching this Facebook product, also has
Ivy’s husband as a registered director. Unbelievably, it appears they have
registered this shell company as a couple. I have no idea who her husband
is, but he is definitely not employed by Facebook and no one at Facebook
appeared to anticipate his involvement at all. There’s some suggestion that
he’s trying to get business with Facebook, and I guess registering yourself
as a director of a product being illegally launched would give you some
leverage in those endeavors.
In the hours leading up to publication of the New York Times story,
everyone involved in the China project is in full-blown panic. Debbie
messages me, “OMG this china thing is a shit show.”
“Yes—how can I help?” I respond.
“One: Represent me when I kill Vaughan. Two: Bring rosé to my
house.”
One of those instructions is easier to follow than the other. The story
publishes. But it doesn’t have some of the key details and is not as bad as
Facebook feared.
I’m told that Chinese officials are upset about the leak to the New York
Times and that “Facebook has to get its house in order.” The apps are shut
down. But months later Ivy’s name is added to more Facebook applications
with the Chinese government: applications for an Oculus license in China
and a start-up incubator Facebook sets up in 2018 to give out $30 million to
small businesses in China. After all, it’s worked for them so far. This is after
Facebook had simply launched Oculus and its apps in 2014 with the
strategy of not seeking a license and “playing dumb.” China eventually
grants a license for Oculus years later when Ivy applies and approves
registration for the Facebook subsidiary designed to give out tens of
millions to China’s small businesses, although the subsidiary’s registration

disappears from the public record under mysterious circumstances. I don’t
know what happened to that $30 million.
Beyond all this, Facebook’s chief financial officer has flagged serious
concerns from the tax team around public statements the company’s making
about Facebook’s China advertising revenue, its second-largest market after
the United States. Which Vaughan is forced to concede “is challenging”
because “what we do in accounting will impact the important tax
negotiation we hope to have shortly.” The CFO’s also concerned about all
the hiring Facebook is doing in China.
This leads me to discover yet another issue, this one with our employees
in Beijing. Facebook’s chief representative in China—who used to report to
Joel and now reports to me—is working there illegally. They don’t have the
correct work permit and—beyond that—Facebook is required to have a
local subsidiary if it wants to employ anyone in China, which it does not. I
ask one of our lawyers to look into this, and she writes explaining that if
Facebook’s chief representative in China decides to point out the ways
Facebook is breaking the law to Chinese authorities, they could cause
“significant harm” to Facebook.
As I see it, they have the ability to “bring the house of cards down”
by simply raising a grievance—any grievance—in relation to their
employment in China, e.g. failure of FB to pay appropriate social
security contributions, incorrect tax reporting, absence of company
regulations, claim for additional bonus, etc.
What’s strange is that no one seems to have considered how hiring
Facebook’s chief representative in China this way might “bring the house of
cards down.”
I guess no one’s considered it because Facebook’s chief representative
in China is not the only one; other parts of Facebook are staffing up teams
in China. Facebook has had office space for employees in China for years
now. In response to concerns from Facebook’s CFO, Vaughan claims this
has all been “blessed” by legal, but this is quickly shot down by one of
Facebook’s most senior lawyers with a “clarification” that it was “*not*
blessed.”

Facebook is operating illegally in China. One of America’s biggest
publicly listed companies is completely indifferent to the rules.

44
Emotional Targeting
By now, it feels like the day-to-day at Facebook is lurching from one
dismaying shit show to the next. Mark and Sheryl seem completely
removed. Focused on presidential runs or promoting new books or
commencement speeches or whatever.
In April 2017, a confidential document is leaked that reveals Facebook
is offering advertisers the opportunity to target thirteen-to-seventeen-year-
olds across its platforms, including Instagram, during moments of
psychological vulnerability when they feel “worthless,” “insecure,”
“stressed,” “defeated,” “anxious,” “stupid,” “useless,” and “like a failure.”
Or to target them when they’re worried about their bodies and thinking of
losing weight. Basically, when a teen is in a fragile emotional state.
Facebook’s advertising team had made this presentation for an
Australian client that explains that Instagram and Facebook monitor
teenagers’ posts, photos, interactions, conversations with friends, visual
communications, and internet activity on and off Facebook’s platforms and
use this data to target young people when they’re vulnerable. In addition to
the moments of vulnerability listed, Facebook finds moments when
teenagers are concerned with “body confidence” and “working out & losing
weight.”
At first blush it sounds pretty gross, sifting through teens’ private
information to identify times when they might be feeling worthless and
vulnerable to an advertiser flogging flat-tummy tea or whatever other
rubbish.

But apparently Facebook’s proud of it. They’ve placed a story in
Australia explaining how the company uses targeting based on emotions:
“How Brands Can Tap into Aussie and Kiwis [sic] Emotions: Facebook
Research,” which touts how Facebook and Instagram use the “emotional
drivers of behavior” to allow advertisers to “form a connection.” The
advertising industry understands that we buy more stuff when we are
insecure, and it’s seen as an asset that Facebook knows when that is and can
target ads when we’re in this state.
It’s a reporter for an Australian newspaper who’s gotten his hands on
one of the internal documents about how Facebook actually does this, and
he reaches out for a comment from Facebook before publishing. That’s
when I hear about it. I didn’t know anything about this and neither did the
policy team in Australia. It’s an advertising thing. I’m put on a response
team of communications specialists, members from the privacy team and
measurement team, and safety policy specialists that’s supposed to figure
out what to say publicly.
No one in that group, other than me and my Australian team, seems
surprised that Facebook made an advertising deck like this. One person
messages the group, “I have a very strong feeling that she [the Australian
staffer who prepared the deck] is not the only researcher doing this work.
So do we want to open a giant can of worms or not?” And they’re right. At
first, we think the leaked document is one Facebook made to pitch a gum
manufacturer to target teenagers during vulnerable emotional states. Then
eventually the team realize, no, the one that got leaked was for a bank.
There are obviously many decks like this.
The privacy staffer explains that teams do this type of customized work
targeting insecurities for other advertisers, and there are presentations for
other clients specifically targeting teens. We discuss the possibility that this
news might lead to investigations by state attorneys general or the Federal
Trade Commission, because it might become public that Facebook
commercializes and exploits Facebook’s youngest users.
To me, this type of surveillance and monetization of young teens’ sense
of worthlessness feels like a concrete step toward the dystopian future
Facebook’s critics had long warned of.

A statement is quickly drafted and the response team debates whether
Facebook can include the line, “We take this very seriously and are taking
every effort to remedy the situation,” since in fact this is apparently just
normal business practice. A comms staffer points out what should be
obvious: that “we can’t say we’re taking efforts to remedy it if we’re not.”
This prompts other team members to confirm his take, revealing other
examples they know of. Facebook targets young mothers, based on their
emotional states, and targets racial and ethnic groups—for example,
“Hispanic and African American Feeling Fantastic Over-index.” Facebook
does work for a beauty product company tracking when thirteen-to-
seventeen-year-old girls delete selfies, so it can serve a beauty ad to them at
that moment.
We don’t know what happens to young teen girls when they’re targeted
with beauty advertisements after deleting a selfie. Nothing good. There’s a
reason why you erase something from existence. Why a teen girl feels that
it can’t be shared. And surely Facebook shouldn’t then be using that
moment to bombard them with extreme weight loss ads or beauty industry
ads or whatever else they push on teens feeling vulnerable. The weird thing
is that the rest of our Facebook coworkers seem unbothered about this.
My team and I are horrified; one of them messages me, “Also
wondering about asking my apparently morally bankrupt colleagues if they
are aware of any more. The Facebook advertising guy who is cited in the
[Australian] article has three children—I talked him through his kid being
bullied—what was he thinking?”
I’m still struggling to get a better picture of what we’re dealing with
here. So I ask for an independent audit by a third party to understand
everything that Facebook has done like this around the world, targeting
vulnerable people, so I can try to stop it. Who has this information and how
many advertisers has it been shared with? The team is not enthusiastic.
Elliot nixes any audit and cautions against using the word “audit” at all,
even as an ask like mine, saying that “lawyers have discouraged that
description in similar contexts.” He doesn’t say why but I’m guessing he
doesn’t want to create a paper trail, a report with damning details that could
be leaked or subpoenaed. Years later I would learn that British teenager

Molly Russell had saved Instagram posts including one from an account
called Feeling Worthless before committing suicide. “Worthless” being one
of the targeting fields. This only emerged due to a lawsuit that revealed
internal documents acknowledging “palpable risk” of “similar incidents.”
The initial statement Facebook gives the Australian journalist who
discovered the targeting and surveillance back in 2017 does not
acknowledge that this sort of ad targeting is commonplace at Facebook. In
fact, it pretends the opposite: “We have opened an investigation to
understand the process failure and improve our oversight. We will
undertake disciplinary and other processes as appropriate.”
A junior researcher in Australia is fired. Even though that poor
researcher was most likely just doing what her bosses wanted. She’s just
another nameless young woman who was treated as cannon fodder by the
company.
When that doesn’t stop media interest, Elliot says, “We need to push
back hard on the idea that advertisers were enabled to target based on
emotions. Can you share to group so Sheryl et al can i) see the article, ii)
understand next steps.” Joel wants a new, stronger statement, one saying
that we’ve never delivered ads targeted on emotion. He directs that “our
comms should swat that down clearly,” but he’s told that it’s not possible.
Joel’s response: “We can’t confirm that we don’t target on the basis of
insecurity or how someone is feeling?” Facebook’s deputy chief privacy
officer responds, “That’s correct, unfortunately.” Elliot asks whether it is
possible to target on words like “depressed” and the deputy chief privacy
officer confirms that, yes, Facebook could customize that for advertisers.
He explains that not only does Facebook offer this type of customized
behavioral targeting, there’s a product team working on a tool that would
allow advertisers to do this themselves, without Facebook’s help.
Despite this, Elliot, Joel, and many of Facebook’s most senior
executives devise a cover-up. Facebook issues a second statement that’s a
flat-out lie: “Facebook does not offer tools to target people based on their
emotional state.” The new statement is circulated to a large group of senior
management who know it’s a lie, and approve it anyway. It reads,

On May 1, 2017, The Australian posted a story regarding research
done by Facebook and subsequently shared with an advertiser. The
premise of the article is misleading. Facebook does not offer tools to
target people based on their emotional state.
The analysis done by an Australian researcher was intended to
help marketers understand how people express themselves on
Facebook. It was never used to target ads and was based on data that
was anonymous and aggregated.
I take a couple of days off for a family trip and to celebrate Xanthe’s
birthday, and the response team continues on without me. I’m glad to miss
it.
One of the top ad executives for Australia calls me late one night to
complain. Why are we putting out statements like this? he wants to know.
“This is the business, Sarah. We’re proud of this. We shout this from the
rooftops. This is what puts money in all our pockets. And these statements
make it look like it’s something nefarious.” It looks bad in front of our
advertisers, he says, for Facebook to pretend it’s not doing this targeting.
He’s out there every day promoting the precision of these tools that hoover
up so much data and insight on and off Facebook so that it can deliver the
right ad at the right time to the right user. And this is what headquarters is
saying to the public? “How do I explain this?” he asks. And thirteen-to-
seventeen-year-olds? “That’s a very important audience. Advertisers really
want to reach them. And we have them! We’re pretending we don’t do
this?”
As if to back him up, just three days after the false denial, on an
earnings call Sheryl touts Facebook’s ability to target based on sex and age,
stating, “We think that targeting and measurement are significant
competitive advantages for us.… Just in basic targeting itself, just age and
gender, we’re 38% more accurate than broad-based targeting according to
Nielsen in the U.S. And that’s just age and gender.”
I know I’m on vacation and I have a valid excuse to stay out of this, to
not put any grit in the machine or damage my standing with leadership. I
know anything I do or say at this point will not change the choices

leadership is making. I know it’s in my best interest to just stay silent. To
not sabotage myself.
But then before I can think too hard about it, I’m confronting Elliot.
Relaying the call I had from the ad executive and my own concerns that
we’re lying to the public, more angrily than I mean to. Why, I ask Elliot,
can’t we just stop targeting depressed teenagers, and anyone else in a
vulnerable emotional state? We’ll still make a lot of money. It can’t be that
much of our business.
Elliot’s amused.
“If you and he both hate this—for opposite reasons—we must’ve gotten
this exactly right.”

45
A Fish Rots from the Head
Trust is gone between staff and leadership at Facebook. The lingering
discontent over Facebook’s role in Trump’s election, the Feminist Fight
Club’s issues, and the broader silence and lack of contrition about the harm
Facebook is causing globally have changed how so many people feel about
working here. Before all this, you felt proud to be at Facebook. That’s gone.
People feel like they’re complicit. Internal Facebook groups are starting
to see posts from employees asking if they could move to different teams
where they could “try not to be morally implicated.” It’s harder to recruit. In
fact, prospective hires are telling recruiters to never contact them again, that
they’ll never work for Facebook. That’s new.
But the leadership at Facebook doesn’t seem to get it. Sheryl despairs
after meeting with the new crop of interns that they’re focusing on the
wrong questions, with their insistence on asking about morality and culture.
She is seemingly unaware of the generational shift as Generation Z enters
the workforce. “Why aren’t they asking about the business?” she fumes.
“Not a single question on that.”
Management meetings now regularly include discussions of how to
manage mental health and morale issues. Elliot holds a “fireside chat” (sans
fireside) to boost morale on his team—which is now hundreds of people.
During this pep talk, a few weeks after Davos, he declares that the elites at
Davos are out of touch but Mark and Sheryl are different from other
business leaders because of their “moral authority.” He’s grasped that the
issue of moral authority is being discussed by the people who work at

Facebook; what he’s missed is that the employees are wondering where it
is. That’s how clueless he seems to be about how we’re feeling. “A fish rots
from the head,” whispers a friend after she catches me rolling my eyes.
After Trump begins his term, Joel and Elliot set up “diversity brown bag
sessions” to address the growing discontent over race and gender bias.
When Joel attends these sessions, he’s visibly uncomfortable. Usually he
takes up space, his body languid and voice commanding, but here he’s
angular and awkward, his voice deferential, back to Bush’s “angular dude.”
Mostly these meetings are pretty bland. Issues are raised in the most
noncombative language possible, when they’re raised at all. It’s a room full
of very political people who are not fools. This is less a forum to boldly
hash out the diversity issues facing the department and more of a
pantomime pretending to do that.
So it’s quite surprising in the middle of one of these brown bags when
an FFC member speaks up. “What responsibility does Facebook have when
one of its employees has sexually harassed another?”
It’s as if a current of electricity goes through the room. Joel looks
stricken. FFC members catch each other’s eyes, like, okay, now it’s on.
Before Joel can answer, one of the other senior men in the room jumps
in. “When will women focus on work and stop talking about diversity
already?”
That shuts it down. The room seems to deflate. One of the HR staff
launches into some boring process response about who to report sexual
harassment to and how seriously Facebook takes it and we move on.
Nothing is going to change.
I think many of the employees are fine with that. Most of the company
is made up of white and Asian men who don’t seem to have a problem with
how things have been going. The entitlement in the Facebook offices flows
as freely as the prosecco from the Prosecco Tap that’s installed in one of the
Facebook office kitchens. When there are complaints of gentrification
around Facebook’s Menlo Park campus, driving up rents and forcing
longtime residents out, they post things that could have been lifted from the
pages of Atlas Shrugged, like, “I take exception to think that I am part of

the problem, I won’t be villainized for my own successes in life.” And,
“These people just want our gobs of money.”
At Facebook, the veil of civility is very thin.
When Charlottesville happens—with neo-Nazis marching and a woman
killed—a few people propose questions about it for Mark’s weekly Q&A
session. Mark answers the questions that get the most votes, and a question
on the overcrowding of the Facebook campus gym gets far more than
Charlottesville, the rise of the alt-right, and the new challenges those pose
for Facebook. A year earlier, the Southern Poverty Law Center had provided
Facebook with a list of two hundred hate groups with Facebook pages, most
of them in violation of Facebook’s Terms of Service, which prohibit hate
speech. But Facebook had done next to nothing. The Unite the Right
Facebook page promoting the Charlottesville rally was up for a month
before Facebook removed it, the day before the event. The FFC wants to
hear Mark address all this, but we don’t have the votes to make that happen.
Most of the company would rather talk about the gym.
Mark and Sheryl, meanwhile, respond to the public outcry against
Facebook—the deluge of headlines that say we’re making the world worse
—by calling it a “witch hunt” or “scapegoating.” People who criticize
Facebook employees “just didn’t understand.” They act like we’re the
victims.
It reminds me of the way a nationalist movement responds to criticism.
Nationalism always begins with the claim that you’re on the principled,
moral, righteous side of things. That’s always just a given at Facebook.
You’re an insider. Even now, there’s a lot of self-congratulatory talk about
how we’re connecting the world and not everyone understands our mission.
And Mark often uses the weekly company Q&A, which some wanted to
rename “Question Mark,” to mythologize the past. He tells stories about
how people thought he was crazy not to sell Facebook when Yahoo offered
him a billion dollars, or how the company introduced the newsfeed and
everyone was so upset but ultimately people learned to love it. How he was
so clever to buy WhatsApp (he doesn’t mention the spyware Onavo that
showed him which apps to buy by giving him confidential usage data,
making acquisitions like shooting fish in a barrel). It’s us against the

outsiders and haters, whether that’s the media, academics, or other
companies. It’s us versus them. And as with nationalism, there’s something
cleansing in this narrative pushed from the top, something comforting about
being in the right, an organized innocence.
So the schism widens between employees who feel that Facebook is
wronged by its critics and those who feel that Facebook needs to right its
wrongs in the world.
Despite its public statement to the contrary, Facebook was long aware that
its research, models, and programs sought to optimize user engagement at
all costs. Facebook employed a series of “addictive by design” features
specifically targeted and tailored to exploiting the vulnerabilities of young
users, while hiding the risky and harmful nature of such features. Forcing
every lever to drive engagement and drive that addiction.
There is one hope. The powerful algorithms that are contributing to
atomized societies could be weakened because they have the potential to
cause so much harm that they hurt the bottom line. In an internal memo
titled “Mapping a Vector Space in Motion,” Facebook’s chief technology
officer, Andrew Bosworth, urges senior management to change Facebook’s
focus on engagement at all costs, pointing out that it is irresponsibly
influencing behaviors, including negative behaviors. Acknowledging
Facebook’s centrality in all of it.
We [Facebook] make the weather.…
Lately, however, we have been thinking more deeply about how
the content we show not only responds to existing affinities but also
reinforces or shapes future affinities, potentially by clustering
people and cutting off some points from other points prematurely.…
We have been prematurely optimizing and we are driving towards a
local maxima and … what we have to do is relax the optimization a
bit. Take a hit on time spent and engagement and let things flow
with greater exploration.

Boz showed that Facebook’s senior management knew exactly what
Facebook was doing. Then he argued that Facebook should step back from
all this “optimizing and driving,” instead letting people have greater input
and more control over the content they see.
But nothing changed.
After the election, and with all the other problems coming to light, they
could’ve decided to genuinely clean things up. Instead they create some
window-dressing “fact checking partnerships” and, before long, some of the
main “partners,” Snopes and the Associated Press, pull out. “They’ve
essentially used us for crisis PR,” Brooke Binkowski, the former managing
editor of Snopes, tells the Guardian. “They’re not taking anything seriously.
They are more interested in making themselves look good and passing the
buck.… They clearly don’t care.” A different fact-checker who had long
worked for Facebook vents their frustration to the Guardian: “They are a
terrible company and, on a personal level, I don’t want to have anything to
do with them.”
Even the office feels different. One day there’s a commotion in the large
open space where the policy team works. I run over from my desk and see a
woman convulsing on the floor. She’s foaming at the mouth and her face is
bleeding. She must’ve hit something when she fell from her desk. And she’s
being completely ignored. She’s surrounded by desks and people at
computers and no one’s helping her. Everyone types busily on their
keyboards, pretending nothing is happening. She’s spasming violently,
bringing her dangerously close to mobile filing drawers with sharp metal
edges.
I and two members of the FFC who are both relatively new to the team
push aside the furniture and call 911 but can’t provide the basic information
the dispatcher needs. History of seizures? The woman’s age? Her name?
“Are you her manager?” I ask a woman at a nearby desk who seems to
be studiously concentrating on her computer, while a woman convulses in
pain at her feet.
“Yes. But I’m very busy,” she says brusquely.

“Are you serious? What’s her name? Does she have epilepsy? How can
we help her?”
The woman looks surprised. “She’s a contractor. I don’t have that sort of
information. Her contract’s coming to an end soon. I suggest you call HR.”
We do. They refer us to a company that manages contractors. The
representative for that company doesn’t pick up. The woman continues to
convulse.
This is not what it was like to work here when I began in 2011. There
was a boisterous, happy energy to the place. The idea that someone could
be in pain, writhing at your feet, and just be ignored, that was unthinkable.
The guys in the office could be obnoxious or fratty, but I never doubted that
they would’ve jumped in. They did have that much basic human decency.
But now everyone around me seems completely detached. Shut down.
Anxiously looking at their screens, eyes on the job. I don’t want that to
become who I am.

46
Myanmar
We’re not just treating each other badly in our own headquarters. We’re also
doing some real damage out in the world. And I’m failing when I try to get
the people in charge to care.
Take Myanmar. By now, it’s not that I expect anything good or
responsible from Facebook’s leadership. There was a time when I could
make that happen, but I know I can’t influence the things that matter now.
It’s hard for me to hold on to the difference between knowing when to
perservere and knowing when to quit. I keep telling myself I can do more to
change things inside than I can out. So I’m trying to work the rotten system
to achieve what little I can to make things better. In this case, I’m trying to
do something very simple. I want to hire a human rights expert to manage
Myanmar. But even this is not going well.
Myanmar exemplifies how damaging Facebook can be. But to
understand this and why I can’t hire someone to fix it we need to go back in
time. Since my visit to Myanmar four years ago, things have deteriorated
there. And Facebook has played a big role in this unraveling.
Myanmar is the one country where Mark’s dream for Internet.org kind
of came true. Since my time there in 2013, it went from having virtually no
internet to everyone on mobile, totally skipping desktops. And on mobile
phones, Facebook is the internet for nearly everyone. Facebook made deals
with the local telecoms to preload phones with Facebook, and in many
plans, time spent on Facebook wasn’t counted toward your minutes.

So in Myanmar, if you’re on the internet, you’re on Facebook, and
because of this, Myanmar demonstrates better than anywhere the havoc
Facebook can wreak when it’s truly ubiquitous. The best way I can describe
what’s happened there is a kind of lethal carelessness. At every turn, when
Facebook’s leaders see how Facebook is inflaming tensions and making an
unstable and frightening political situation much worse, they do … nothing.
We got our first real glimpse of how badly things can go in 2014, nearly
one year after I met with the junta. In April 2014 I and some others on the
policy team hear that there is virulent hate speech circulating in Myanmar.
Most of it is targeted at the country’s Muslim minority, the Rohingya. Mobs
are burning down mosques. We go to the content team that’s responsible for
removing hate speech and ask if there’s more we can do to address it, and
we’re told no. They’ve just hired a new Burmese contractor to manage this;
everything is fine. Facebook’s head of content policy says, “I can confirm
our Burmese rep has plenty of bandwidth.” We push for more details and
they provide a breakdown showing that they only have four or five reports
of hate speech in the queue, which is nothing.
A few months after this exchange with the content team, a riot is
triggered by a Facebook post and the junta blocks Facebook on July 4,
2014. The post claimed a Buddhist woman had been raped by a Muslim
man, a tea shop owner. Much later a UN report concludes that the story is
fabricated. But it went viral after it was shared by a Buddhist monk who’s
often described as the “Burmese Bin Laden,” Ashin Wirathu. Wirathu had
been jailed in the past for inciting religious hatred, and he was beginning to
figure out how to weaponize Facebook. (And yes, I know the phrase
“Buddhist monk” conjures something very different from “terrorist” for
most people, but members of the Buddhist majority in Myanmar have
persecuted Rohingya Muslims for decades.)
I get an email telling me the junta wants us to remove Wirathu’s posts
about this alleged rape. Because they’re causing real-world violence—riots
are ongoing, Buddhist mobs are attacking Muslim shops, people are dying
—the posts seem like a clear violation of our standards. But the content
operations team—which is based in Dublin—doesn’t want to take down the
posts. The case officer tells me she doesn’t think they violate our rules, but

she can’t find anyone who speaks Burmese, and Google Translate doesn’t
do Burmese, so she can’t say for sure.
I pull in someone more senior, and he reaches out to that same
contractor they’d hired a few months before—a Burmese guy based in
Dublin—to review the material. Five hours pass.
“How long do you think this will take?” I ask. There are riots in the
streets over this. I really need these posts to come down.
“Unfortunately no idea,” the senior guy responds. “He’s offline, I have
pinged him on FB and hope he sees it and gets back to me.”
“Do you have a contact phone number for him?” I write. “This is an
emergency.”
The senior guy calls him. The Burmese contractor is at a restaurant and
I’m told he’ll go home and “should have access to a PC in fifteen minutes.”
He’ll comb through the posts to try to see what is being said, and if we
would action it or not. Nearly two hours pass, and the senior guy confesses
that the contractor does not have his work laptop and he himself is on the
road but he’ll get to it when he gets home later. I feel both responsible and
completely impotent.
“When will you be in a position to do this? We really need to move
quickly,” I urge.
After receiving no response, I find a way to get other people to take
down the posts from California, but to do that we need the senior guy to
send the links that have been reported. Finally he does, the three posts are
removed, and four minutes later we get notification that Facebook was
unblocked in Myanmar, despite the fact that it’s 4:30 A.M. there.
This cannot be the system Facebook relies on when people are dying. If
posts are causing riots in the streets, we can’t be depending on some
random contractor in Ireland who’s out to dinner and can’t find his laptop.
Based on this and the experience over the last few months, I suggest to
both leadership and the content teams that we need to rethink how to handle
Myanmar, and figure out what we did wrong and how we fix it. This does
not go over well. The head of the content team emails that her people “did
exactly what they were supposed to do. This content, on its face, did not
violate our policies.… Those 3 posts contained factual reports and calls to

political action—not hate speech.” I point out that this doesn’t matter under
our own guidelines, which state clearly that we remove content “when we
perceive a genuine risk of physical harm, or a direct threat to public safety.”
Triggering real-world violence like riots violates our rules. They think they
can ignore this because it’s happening in Myanmar, but as with the elections
of despots, if Facebook can enable it in one place, the pattern will surely
repeat unless it is actively prevented. This gets me nowhere. The head of
content policy doesn’t want to do more training, and doesn’t see anything
wrong with how this was handled. In fact, they want to send a “quick note
reassuring the CO [content operations] folks that they did the right thing
here.” They tell leadership,
“To be clear on CO’s responsibilities here  … [the] team did exactly
what they were supposed to do. This content, on its face, did not violate our
policies.”
I disagree. At this point in 2014, Myanmar is too explosive—grappling
with hate speech, fake news, and mob violence, struggling to become a
democracy—for us to treat it like any other country. Millions in Myanmar
think of Facebook as the internet, and we have only one person who speaks
Burmese in Facebook’s operations team. That’s it. One person. Compared
with the hundreds for China. One man in Dublin, who isn’t even on staff, to
resolve all of the hate speech roiling Myanmar.
The note thanking the content operations team for how they handled this
gets sent anyway.
So even though the content operations team doesn’t want to figure out
what’s going on with reported content in Myanmar, at least my team and I
can try. Within weeks, we learn just how crudely Facebook is functioning in
Myanmar. For example, we’ve never posted our Community Standards in
Burmese, so it would be impossible for anyone to know what’s allowed and
what isn’t. Basic architecture of the site—the like button and most
importantly the reporting button that you’d use to alert Facebook to
problematic content—is not in Burmese (or shows up as corrupted
characters). And—biggest and most surprising of all—Facebook is
incompatible with the Burmese language. Facebook’s site could be
translated into Burmese at any point. It’s just … not a priority.

In addition to all this, Myanmar is one of the few countries that doesn’t
run on Unicode. This Unicode is the universal standard for encoding text on
computers. As a result, if you’re in Myanmar, you can type posts in
Facebook and read them as recognizable Burmese characters. But for
anyone outside Myanmar, the letters are just an unreadable jumble.
How do you moderate the content when you can’t read it? We go to the
head of internationalization at Facebook, who tells us that she and
engineering are very aware of this problem with Burmese, and it’s
eminently solvable. In fact, she’d tried to address it a year before this, but
nobody would listen. She just needs someone to prioritize it and assign
engineers. Myanmar is a huge potential market for Facebook, with over
sixty million people. A few weeks after the riot, I go to Elliot and Javi and
the head of content policy and others to plead my case. In the wake of the
riots, now we can see how deadly Facebook can be in Myanmar. We need to
do a better job monitoring hate speech on the platform. So we need
everything in Unicode. Nobody cares. I’m told, “I would love to prioritize
getting this done.… I just don’t think we can justify that given the other
things in our pipeline.” By contrast, there’s no problem spinning up huge
teams of expensive engineers to build a Facebook tool to facilitate Chinese
censorship.
This would become a consistent refrain whenever my team and I ask for
something for Myanmar.
Faced with the absurd situation that Facebook can’t actually post in
Burmese on its own platform, my team translates the Community Standards
and a tip sheet on how to report questionable content, and we print it as a
handout. A leaflet. Like it’s the year 1776 and Thomas Paine has this great
commonsense idea about independence from Great Britain. That’s how
we’re going to get the word out. We go to the comms team to ask for their
help in getting this to people in Myanmar. We’re told no. “Myanmar isn’t a
priority country in SEA [Southeast Asia], which means we don’t have any
PR resources on the ground.”
And then, the kicker in June 2015: while trying to help groups and
activists report abusive content on Facebook, my team starts noticing that
users appear to be using unofficial Facebook apps that don’t offer a

reporting function. This is something that civil society had been trying to
tell us, but it seemed so preposterous that we didn’t believe them initially.
Then we learn that the official Facebook app is still unavailable for
download in Myanmar and, as a result, unofficial versions of the app get
shared through friends and at mobile shops. It seems impossible to report
the hate speech, racist posts, or content intended to trigger violence even if
they could solve the language and Unicode issues.
This explains why we’ve had a steady flow of complaints from the
junta, civil society, activists, and others all complaining about fake news,
hacked accounts, and racist, violent, threatening content on the site. They
said it’s impossible to report these posts, and in the few cases they managed
to get a report through, no one took action. They clicked on a button and
nothing happened. It also explains why the content team confidently
assured me throughout 2014 that users in Myanmar weren’t filing reports
about questionable content. Of course they weren’t filing reports. Of course
we took no action. Our users weren’t using apps capable of any of that.
As if that’s not troubling enough, a new problem emerges in May 2015.
By slowly piecing together the decisions being made by the now two
Burmese contractors who are doing all the content moderation in Dublin for
the content reports that manage to make it through all those issues, my team
and I start to suspect that one of them is allowing a lot of racist content onto
the site. He’s allowing a slur for Muslims that’s the equivalent of the N-
word—kalar—and defending its use, even in posts calling for people’s
blood. He’s removing more posts by civil society groups and peace activists
than government and anti-Muslim accounts. Worried he might be in cahoots
with the junta, we raise this with the content team, who tell us there’s
nothing to worry about.
We inform our bosses and plead with them to do something, anything,
to make the content team address it, but nothing comes of that. We ask them
to ban the word kalar, if they won’t deal with the moderator. They refuse.
(Years later, after untold harm, Facebook finally bans the slur.)
With few other options, my team sets up clandestine meetings with
nongovernmental organizations in Myanmar that track what’s posted on
Facebook, to gather information to make our arguments internally. It feels

weird and disloyal to collaborate with groups outside Facebook to solve an
issue within Facebook, but I don’t see what other choice we have. One of
the groups has been monitoring the posts and accounts Facebook takes
down, keeping records on big Excel spreadsheets, and it confirms that our
moderators are not removing racist and nationalist content that should come
down, and they’re taking down other content they shouldn’t.
We set up secret Facebook groups where civil society organizations can
communicate directly with us about whatever problems are not getting
addressed on the platform. They send us examples of posts where
government ministers spread hate speech and talk about how they’ll ensure
Muslims won’t be able to vote in the upcoming election. Or junta-backed
candidates encouraging their followers to burn a mosque to the ground.
This all heats up as Myanmar heads toward its first fully free, fully
contested election in decades, scheduled for November 2015, an election
where millions will be voting for the first time. A month before the election,
the civil society groups use the secret group to tell us that liberal candidates
opposing the junta have been removed from Facebook en masse. Their
accounts have been suspended in response to mass reports saying the
accounts are fake. Our platform is so dysfunctional in Burmese that there’s
no way to verify accounts. My team gets them reinstated.
At the same time, the junta starts to arrest civil society members for
their Facebook posts.
More than anything, it feels like we’re flying blind. This extremely
fragile country is heading into a contentious election while struggling with
hate speech, violence, and ethnic tension that Facebook appears to be
enabling. It’s like a newborn that needs extra care. In a country where most
people treat Facebook as though it is the internet, leadership have assigned
only two full-time Burmese staffers and it is unclear whether they are
employees or contractors (and two bonus contractors for the week of the
election), and they’re all based in Dublin, so not in the right time zone to
monitor all the posts. To properly cover the country as well as we cover,
say, Germany, we’d need hundreds of skilled moderators. And in China we
had promised four hundred initially, rising to over two thousand Facebook
employees. I know the size of the Myanmar staff is woefully inadequate, so

my team and I do what we can. On the cusp of the election, I divide up the
clock with a teammate in Australia so there’s always someone from our
team monitoring any reports to Facebook and our secret groups even in the
middle of the night, the fear of catastrophe ever present.
In the end, the election goes peacefully, with only rare and isolated
incidents of violence in the run-up. The National League for Democracy
sweeps into power in a landslide, driving out the junta. But as we head into
2016, it’s still unclear whether the military will respect the results and step
down.
After the election, the hate speech and fake news on Facebook continue,
worse than we’ve seen in any other country. The junta is supposedly
transitioning to democracy but that seems to be backsliding, and we
genuinely can’t tell where they stand on all this. Sometimes they ask to
collaborate to fight hate speech, but we don’t know if that’s sincere or if
they’re doing it as an underhanded way to crack down on their political
opponents. We’re in over our heads. We don’t understand the role Facebook
is playing in the country. And much of the platform still isn’t working as it
should in Myanmar. We need to get someone on the ground to figure it out
and start to work on solutions urgently, every day. Or at least that’s what I
think. The leadership of Facebook is utterly indifferent.
Then I think I’ve struck lucky. I’ve managed to find someone with
exactly the right expertise. And when I say “the right expertise,” I’m not
just referring to his extensive human rights experience. I’ve learned by this
point that hiring for a senior position at Facebook follows certain unspoken
rules. If you want someone to actually influence the policy and political
decisions that are ultimately made by Joel and Elliot, they’ll have a greater
chance of success if they’re male, older, white, and a Harvard graduate.
Facebook’s leaders want someone just like them. The ultimate trump card is
if they’re friends with Joel, Elliot, Marne, Sheryl, or especially Mark. A few
years ago, one of the Republicans in the DC office—an old Capitol Hill
veteran with a dry sense of humor—sat me down to explain.
“Sarah, you know your boss Joel. He’s a Jew who went to Harvard.”
“Yes,” I said uneasily, worried that we’re drifting into some anti-Semitic
conversation I don’t want to be part of.

“And his boss.”
“Elliot.”
“Yes—a Jew who went to Harvard; and his boss … a Jew who went to
Harvard. And her boss…”
“A Jew who dropped out of Harvard?” I venture.
“You’re catching on,” he said. “So you see, one of these things is not
like the other.”
“You mean me?”
“Yeah,” he said. “You’re not like these people. And you’ll never be like
them. And the sooner you grasp this, the better.”
Facebook is an elite product, born in an elite college, fronted by elite
Harvard grads who show up for other elite Harvard grads, who are decision
makers in all sorts of places. A pragmatist accepts that and moves forward.
And so, back in 2016, I decided that until I walked out the door for the last
time, I would try to work the system, because for so long I still believed I
could do more good inside than out, by doing things like hiring good
people. I accepted that I failed to get the changes Myanmar needs, and I’d
probably continue to be ignored, but I started the process to hire a Harvard
man who might be able to fix Facebook’s problems in Myanmar in a way
that I can’t. Someone who could focus exclusively on Myanmar without
responsibility for hundreds of other issues. Someone who’d wake up every
day and devote all their efforts to the problems Facebook is causing in
Myanmar. Someone leadership would listen to. Hiring someone with
responsibility for Myanmar is obviously the right thing to do.
The guy I find is a human rights expert based in Thailand, with a
master’s from Harvard, and—bingo!—a friend of Elliot’s. Years before this,
Elliot had suggested I try to find work for him at Facebook. He’s dated a
member of the policy team and she vouches for him, satisfying the
requirement of casual nepotism that runs through most of the senior team,
and we have an opening in Thailand that I can expand to include Myanmar,
getting around the sad fact that it would be impossible to convince
Facebook’s leadership to hire someone just for Myanmar.

The process of hiring this guy drags on for months. Finally, I’m in my
regular weekly meeting with Joel in February 2017. Everyone else has
signed off on hiring him. I come back to Joel and say it’s time to make this
happen. Things in Myanmar seem darker and more confusing each day.
We’re good to go. The candidate is good to go. Let’s do it.
For the first time since I started this long process of trying to hire
someone for Myanmar in 2015, and with this particular Harvard man since
May 2016, Joel levels with me.
He tells me it’s time to move on and get over it. He concocts a
bureaucratic reason to say no: that it would be wrong to “install my guy” in
this job because I’m only in charge of Asia temporarily. Never mind that I
started this hire long before there was any suggestion I was temporary.
Never mind that we need someone in-country and we’re not going to find a
more qualified candidate. He tells me not to raise the issue again.
Over the next few months, the hate speech and inflammatory posts in
Myanmar only increase. Journalists and activists are being arrested for
things they post on Facebook. Civil society groups raise an alarm about the
rampant misuse of Facebook services in Myanmar, saying things like,
I think it’s critical to recognize that Facebook is being used
deliberately, systematically, and very effectively to target not just
peace and interfaith activists, but also journalists and anyone who
deviates from the dominant [junta] narrative.
Facebook’s security team documents a widespread pattern in which
people’s accounts are being hacked and taken over in Myanmar. They
discover a secret Facebook group with 571 members that seems to be a site
for planning and sharing information for spearfishing attacks on verified
users and pages. This group seems to be doing another thing the civil
society activists warned Facebook about: they’re taking over the verified
accounts of anyone in Myanmar with a large following and pumping out
content, lurid photos, fake news, incendiary memes, and propaganda,
pretending to be them. Spreading rumors to both Muslim and Buddhist
groups that an attack from the other side was imminent. Anything that
would spread hatred and fear, making people vulnerable and wanting the

protection of the military. And of course Facebook would elevate all this
content because it received so much engagement.
So Facebook knows this is happening, but it doesn’t mean it does
anything about it. When my team recommends taking down posts that are
destabilizing or coded hate speech—or posts that might lead to real-world
violence—the content operations team often throws up its hands, saying the
posts don’t violate local laws, so there’s no reason to take them down.
When a fake news story goes viral in June 2017, saying that the
democratically elected president of Myanmar is resigning, my team
recommends as usual that we take it down, worried it’ll further destabilize
the country. And as usual, the content team and legal team leave it up.
Frustrated, the person on my team handling Myanmar responds,
There is a commonly held belief that the military or someone is
trying to undermine democracy in Myanmar. We have identified
hundreds of accounts trying to destabilise things. Security
operations is currently reviewing.… Are we going to let our service
be used to destabilise…?
The answer is apparently yes.
The unthinkable happens. In late August, the military launches a
campaign of atrocities against the Muslim population that the UN later
describes as genocide and crimes against humanity. At least ten thousand
people are murdered. The clinical language of the UN report on this
somehow makes it all seem more horrible. They interviewed over eight
hundred eyewitnesses and victims of the violence.
Children were killed in front of their parents, and young girls were
targeted for sexual violence.… Rape and other forms of sexual
violence were perpetrated on a massive scale.… Sometimes up to 40
women and girls were raped or gang-raped together.… Rapes were
often in public spaces and in front of families and the community,
maximizing humiliation and trauma. Mothers were gang raped in
front of young children, who were severely injured and in some
instances killed.… Women and girls were systematically abducted,

detained and raped in military and police compounds, often
amounting to sexual slavery. Victims were severely injured before
and during rape, often marked by deep bites. They suffered serious
injuries to reproductive organs, including from rape with knives and
sticks. Many victims were killed or died from injuries.…
Others [men and women] were killed in arson attacks, burned to
death in their own houses, in particular the elderly, persons with
disabilities and young children, unable to escape. In some cases,
people were forced into burning houses, or locked in buildings set
on fire.
Over seven hundred thousand Muslims fled the country.
What the world will learn later is that the military had set up a massive
operation—at least seven hundred people—to spread misinformation and
hate on Facebook. This was revealed by a reporter named Paul Mozur in the
New York Times. Sources in the military’s secret operation told him how
they created and took over verified accounts that had huge followings—fan
accounts for pop stars and celebrities, the Facebook page for a military hero
—and used them to pump out false, inflammatory posts. “Troll accounts run
by the military helped spread the content, shout down critics and fuel
arguments between commenters to rile people up.”
As Mozur points out, “It’s among the first examples of an authoritarian
government using the social network against its own people.”
Facebook’s response to Mozur? The company issued a statement saying,
“It had found evidence that the messages were being intentionally spread by
inauthentic accounts and took some down at the time. It did not investigate
any link to the military at that point.”
Which raises the question, What was Facebook’s role in all of this? The UN
report on the human rights violations in Myanmar devotes over twenty
pages to the critical role Facebook played in spreading hate. It catalogs the
different kinds of derogatory language investigators found in posts, memes,
and cartoons—including several variations on the ethnic slur kalar, the

word our team tried and failed to ban for years because we couldn’t
convince the decision makers at Facebook to take action. It lists the
different anti-Muslim narratives found on Facebook: posts that portray
Muslims and Rohingya as a threat to the Buddhist character of the country
and Burmese racial purity; posts that characterize Muslims as terrorists,
criminals, and rapists; posts that claim they “breed like rabbits” and will
overtake the population. Organizations with an explicitly racist agenda like
MaBaTha, led by the extremist monk Wirathu, have an active Facebook
presence. Death threats, harassment, and calls for violence aren’t just
against Muslims “but also against moderate commentators, human rights
defenders and ordinary people who have views that differ from the official
line.” All of these are issues Facebook had been aware of for years.
The UN investigators point out many of the other issues we’d tried and
failed to convince Facebook’s leaders to address: the woefully inadequate
content moderation Facebook provided for Myanmar; the lack of
moderators who “understand Myanmar language and its nuances, as well as
the context within which comments are made”; the fact that the Burmese
language isn’t rendered in Unicode; the lack of a clear system to report hate
speech and alarming unresponsiveness when it is reported. The
investigators noted with regret that Facebook said it was unable to provide
country-specific data about the spread of hate speech on its platform, which
was imperative to assess the problem and the adequacy of its response. This
was surprising given that Facebook had been tracking hate speech.
Community operations had written an internal report noting that forty-five
of the one hundred most active hate speech accounts in Southeast Asia are
in Myanmar.
The truth here is inescapable. Myanmar would’ve been far better off if
Facebook had never arrived there.
I’ve spent a lot of time thinking about what unfolded next in Myanmar,
and Facebook’s complicity. It wasn’t because of some grander vision or any
malevolence toward Muslims in the country. Nor a lack of money. My
conclusion: It was just that Joel, Elliot, Sheryl, and Mark didn’t give a fuck.
Joel was a veteran of George W. Bush’s White House. An issue in Syria
would be met by a wave of his hand and, “Drop a bomb on it. I don’t care.”

A joke, but also who he was. He was the man in charge of those countries
for Facebook. And when it came to Myanmar, those people just didn’t
matter to him. He couldn’t be bothered. There was no greater principle ever
offered.
People outside big companies sometimes wonder and speculate about
how these sorts of decisions happen. This is how it happened at Facebook.
And it wasn’t just Joel. None of the senior leaders—Elliot or Sheryl or
Mark—thought about this enough to put in place the kinds of systems we’d
need, in Myanmar or other countries. They apparently didn’t care. These
were sins of omission. It wasn’t the things they did; it was the things they
didn’t do.

47
It Really Didn’t Have to Be This Way
Things are bad, but the one saving grace so far has been that Joel and I are
not in the same office or even the same state. So his behavior has so far
been limited by geography to creepy questions and taking our one-on-one
meetings in bed. But Elliot is about to host everyone who works for him at
an offsite, which means Joel will be in town. I’m worried. I fear something
is going to happen.
Joel has recently interviewed for a cabinet position with Trump but
remained at Facebook as the key conduit into the Trump administration.
With Trump’s ascension, he’s become increasingly powerful. Closer to
Mark. Weighing in on not just policy issues but product issues. Core
decisions for the company. This means that decisions about political speech,
content, and the algorithm all go through Joel. It seems to me like a
ratcheting up of the inherent conflict of interest that has always underpinned
his job. Joel’s responsible both for lobbying government and for making
key content and product decisions that keep Facebook in good standing
with the Trump administration.
He doesn’t wear this newfound status lightly.
Through two days of presentations, meals, and group activities, it’s very
awkward with Joel. He drops a napkin at the opening night reception and he
waits and stares at me till I figure out that he’s expecting me to kneel to the
ground and pick it up for him. He makes weird comments about Tom. “Is
Tom gonna let you out tonight?” “You’re going home to Tom now?”

Following a presentation from a famous Silicon Valley venture capitalist
who tells us it’s great that governments around the world are starting to
regulate technology because that will entrench Facebook’s advantage, the
offsite culminates with a blowout dinner and karaoke session at the Hiller
Aviation Museum. I deliberately arrive late, wanting to limit my in-person
exposure to Joel to the bare necessities. We’re almost finished with the team
photos when I feel Joel staring at me. I’m standing with some of the women
in our team. Joel calls out, “Sarah Wynn-Williams is looking sultry
tonight.”
I freeze. I’m not. In fact, it’s hard for me to think of a time in my life
when I’ve looked less sultry. I’m vampirish from sleep deprivation. Up at
all hours doing calls with Asia, plus a one- and three-year-old at home who
don’t like sleeping. Work life and home life are punishing. I haven’t lost the
weight from the second pregnancy. I’m dressed like a nun and devoid of
makeup to avoid any unwanted attention from my boss. But I guess that’s
not the point. This is as much about power as anything else. In fact, Sheryl
later posts,
The 1992 presidential race was once summed up in a pointed
phrase: “It’s the economy, stupid.” Today, as headlines are
dominated by stories about sexual harassment and sexual assault at
work, a similar phrase comes to mind: “It’s the power, stupid.”
And in this situation, I have none.
I try to get as far from him as I can, and head to the middle of the dance
floor. The white, libertarian Ayn Rand fanboys and Republican politics guys
from the policy team are taking turns onstage with embarrassing stilted
karaoke renditions of the raps from Hamilton.
One of the senior women in our team comes over.
“Did you hear Joel call you sultry?” she says, looking concerned.
“Yeah, I’m trying to just ignore it,” I tell her, but it’s a relief to know
that others can see what’s blatantly obvious, right in front of them.
She says something sympathetic, which I can barely hear over the rap
battles, about not being sure if she likes drunk Joel and places a hand on my

shoulder. I feel grateful. Then she drifts away to another part of the dance
floor.
Then Joel comes over, beer in hand, doing some pretty embarrassing
dad dancing. It doesn’t take very long before he’s behind me, grinding into
me.
I feel like an abject object. I momentarily disassociate and in my mind
I’m transported to crowded subway cars in New York on hot sticky days
where bodies are crammed together and it takes moments for your head to
isolate the different body parts pressed against you. Moments more for the
alarm to register.
I flee as fast as I can to the safest place I can think of, which is right
next to Stacey, the HR person, who’s standing by the bar, wine in hand. She
confesses that it’s not her first and invites me to continue drinking at her
place after the offsite, then instructs me to look around.
It’s a writhing mass of drunk corporate lobbyists and staffers. Stacey
pulls me in closer.
“You would not believe the things these people tell me,” she confides.
“Just because I know exactly how much every last one of them is paid, they
think they’ve got to tell me everything. Unbelievable things. Like whatever
you think, worse. Things you shouldn’t tell me or shouldn’t tell anyone.”
Maybe she’s had a few wines and is about to spill some amazing gossip.
Or maybe she has sensed what I wanted to tell her. Maybe she saw me and
Joel on the dance floor and is warning me off discussing it, because she
doesn’t want to do what she’d have to, if I told her. Whichever it is, that
moment convinces me not to confide in her now about Joel.
But I can’t let it go. I feel sick. Because I feel it isn’t going to stop.
There’s an inevitability to it now. If Joel behaves like this in front of our
coworkers, calling me sultry, pushing himself up against me basically in
front of everyone we work with, it means more is likely to come. Surely, it
will only get worse. This isn’t the end. Standing there on the edge of the
dance floor, I decide I have to get out immediately. No more
procrastinating.
While I redouble my efforts to find a job elsewhere, in the meantime I
ask Javi if I can move to his department, the growth team. Javi loves the

idea and sets up interviews with his team, who are all supportive and
anxious for me to start as soon as possible. It’s just a few months since
Trump’s election, and I suggest we could focus on fixing Facebook’s
systems for elections—for content moderation, geoblocking, and more—
before elections in Germany, which are fast approaching. People aren’t
focused on the collision of technology and elections yet. Like when I
pitched to Marne, they don’t really see it as a job. But they’re worried
Facebook isn’t complying with German election law. These are problems I
know I can help fix, and I’m able to convince Javi and his team that I would
bring value to their team beyond just Germany.
I know something’s up when things don’t move fast.
At the same time I pitch this transfer, Eric Holder’s report on sexual
harassment at Uber is getting a lot of attention in Silicon Valley. This came
out in the wake of the revelations by a whistleblowing engineer named
Susan Fowler, who wrote a blog post detailing how she’d been treated by
her bosses at Uber, and the failure of Uber’s HR department to help her.
One of Holder’s big recommendations is specifically about allowing people
to transfer away from bosses who they report are harassing them. At Uber,
supervisors were blocking transfers, trapping women with those they were
complaining about. I assumed that with this in the news, and Sheryl
Sandberg still one of our most visible executives, my transfer would go
through.
I was wrong.
Javi and I try everything to make the transfer happen quickly, but
eventually Javi says the only way through is to plead directly with Elliot so
he unblocks it. I don’t know if it’s Joel or Elliot who’s stopping the transfer,
but it never happens.
Elliot and I meet in his office. He admits that he “knows it’s been tough
for me with Joel.” Then he blindsides me by asking whether my new role
with Javi will involve working with the policy team at all, because “that
might be a problem.”
That’s when I understand he’s not going to let me do this.
“I don’t want to put you in a bad position,” I tell him. “I’m trying to do
the best thing by everyone. You know me. I’m just trying to do my job. I’ve

behaved with integrity throughout all this, and I don’t think that can be said
of everyone, and it seems unjust that I should have to leave my job with
nothing to go to because of Joel’s behavior.”
I mean every word. It doesn’t seem fair that I should have to sell our
house, which we had purchased based on the equity I had been granted but
would not receive if fired; move our children again after moving here at
Mark’s request; go back into the insecurity of renting. Losing the equity is
punishing financially. And it seems unjust that I should have to worry about
health insurance with everything going on with my health, which Elliot is
very aware of. It seems such a steep price to pay for someone else’s
behavior. But I know I am entirely at the mercy of Joel and his bosses.
“You know I’m going to have to let HR know,” Elliot says, meaning, I
assume, he’s going to dismiss me.
I tell him that I thought we had a deal. I’d keep doing my job, I’d shut
up about Joel’s behavior, kill the HR investigation into him, and Elliot
would make the behavior stop. But things have gotten worse.
Elliot doesn’t take the bait. All through this conversation, he’s careful to
say very little.
I tell him it’s not just me. It’s a much broader problem at the company.
“I need to understand what has gone on here,” Elliot responds, which is
surprising because he knows exactly what’s been going on.
Elliot turns his back to dismiss me and the conversation is done.
I leave that meeting and, in an act of extravagance, get an Uber to Sonoma,
where friends have organized a long weekend away with our families. Tom
and the girls are already there.
The driver drops me off and I’ve not quite finished punching in the
security code on the gate when I feel a stabbing pain behind my left knee.
It’s quickly followed by another and another, like a fistful of knives
thrusting in and out of the soft unprotected flesh below one of my best
professional dresses, which I carefully selected for my meeting with Elliot.
It’s soft white; I wanted the visual association of innocence and purity that
white conveys.

Reaching down, I feel firm bodies and crunchy wings and realize that
I’m being attacked by a swarm of wasps that are now zeroing in on the
backs of both my knees. I try to swat them away and get stung on my hand.
Then I attempt to pick them out of my flesh one by one, but they
overwhelm me and I crash down to the ground, writhing in agony. I’d been
brought low by a lot of things, but it’s the wasps that bring me to my knees.
Or rather they’re in my knees and behind my knees and I have no choice
but to drop farther still. I roll in my beautiful white dress on the dusty
country ground, kicking my legs in the air and screaming.
Eventually, I’m relieved to hear movement behind the gate. Tom’s
walking toward me surrounded by children who are screaming and crying.
He gets in our dilapidated car alone and edges carefully out of the main
gate. I think he’s going to open the car door and pull me in and away from
the wasps. The crippling pain in both my knees means that I can’t walk or
even stand. So I drag myself along the ground toward the car, part human,
part wasp swarm.
Just as I reach the car, Tom accelerates, driving off down the narrow
dusty road. The large metallic gates clang shut in automatic efficiency,
leaving the children behind, their screams still in the air.
At this point it is perfectly plausible to me that Tom has simply had
enough of trying to support me through painful situations that are out of his
control and is driving off into the sunset. I almost don’t blame him.
As the wasps continue to attack, the venom from their stings behind my
knees causes my skin to redden, swell, and throb hot with pain. I allow
myself to consider whether this is rock bottom. I stop trying to remove the
wasps or prevent their stings. It doesn’t matter what I do; I’m
outmaneuvered, overpowered, overwhelmed.
Eventually Tom and the car come back into sight. He drives up, leaning
over to open the car door. Apparently, the only way he could open the gate
and keep it open long enough for us to enter was to get the car outside a
certain distance from the gate and push the remote. He helps drag me into
the front seat, wasps and all. I quickly shut the car door, trapping some of
the wasps in the car.

“Sorry, I meant to mention the aggressive wasp nest before you got here
but I’ve been dealing with the children’s wasp stings and a child’s near-
drowning situation.”
I take in the fact that this could have been avoided and turn to him
slowly.
“Would you believe this isn’t even the worst part of my day?” I respond.
As the truth of that statement hits me, a tear escapes. Tom looks at me,
incredulous, and then down at my dirty, swollen, red body, white dress
covered in grime. He takes in what I just said and we both start to laugh.
My tears don’t stop. I’m no longer sure if I’m laughing or crying.
Friends who have fallen for Sheryl’s Lean In schtick earnestly recommend
going to her with my concerns. I get where they’re coming from—this is an
issue she’s chosen to take a high profile on. Around this time she is quoted
in a Bloomberg article recommending a zero tolerance policy to harassment
and saying, “I think it’s great when people lose their jobs when it happens,
because I think that is what will get people to not do it in the future. And I
think it’s a leadership challenge. As a leader of a company, there needs to be
no tolerance for it. People respond to what is tolerated and what is
encouraged.” But having witnessed how she treats her own staff—not to
mention her intimate relationship history with Joel, a relationship where he
often stays at her house when he visits the Valley—and how often her
actions differ from her words, I know that’s not viable.
Heidi Swartz, the company’s chief employment lawyer, tells me that
they’re opening an investigation into my experience with Joel. Elliot then
lets me know he has concerns about my performance. My research has
prepared me for the likelihood that speaking up might lead to this, but the
reality of it still stings.
Oddly, Elliot and Stacey say the main performance issue is that I didn’t
hire people and expand my team fast enough. Over the years I’ve hired
many people and built a large team around the world without incident, but
recently Joel, as the final decision maker, has been actively blocking my
hires. Not just the human rights job in Myanmar but a half dozen others.

I put together a deck documenting all the hires Joel has blocked and
pass it on to Elliot and Stacey. When I meet with them, Elliot admits he
hasn’t looked at it, or any of the regular recruiting updates I’ve sent him,
and I realize what a farce this is. The fix is in.
The investigation rolls out as badly as you could imagine. Very quickly
it seems to switch from an investigation of Joel, or the facts, to an
investigation of me. For example, the “sultry” comment. People who were
there confirm he said it. But then the investigator tells me in an accusatory
way that Joel was looking at a photo of me when he said it. As if that would
make the comment okay rather than weirder, and I was somehow at fault for
not knowing or disclosing this fact.
I start to provide the investigators with documents and names of
witnesses they can talk to. So I’m genuinely shocked when the investigator
emails her findings, letting me know that the investigation has cleared Joel.
Their position is that the review he gave me was not actually a review, but
that he was sharing feedback for the period before I went on maternity leave
(even though nearly all of what was discussed occurred during maternity
leave, and even though Joel acknowledged the timing was “not ideal”).
Because I had asked to “stay involved” in certain matters at the start of my
maternity leave it was felt okay that I had been asked to work during my
maternity leave (I am fairly sure most employers would have not contacted
me after I had come near to death and been in a coma but who knows!).
Apparently, Joel did not remember asking me about breastfeeding or my
bleeding (hard conversations to forget, you’d have thought) and as there
was no one to evidence these comments—nothing to see here! Oh, and
apparently they had been discussing the separation of APAC and LATAM
for years—the fact that it was only after I complained that this was actioned
felt not worthy of too much investigation. In summary, my “challenges”
with Joel were found to be a result of communication issues and “concerns
around my performance.” I’m stunned.
I tell the investigator how surprised I am that they closed out the
investigation before they’d received or reviewed all the documentation and
information I said I would supply or spoken to the people who would
corroborate that information. I hadn’t even handed over the dirty Sanchez

email yet. The speed with which they closed out the investigation and the
way they glossed over my complaints about behaviors certainly suggested
that anything I did now supply would not have made any difference.
Not long after receiving the investigation report, I have my regularly
scheduled six-month performance review. This one’s with Elliot, not Joel
like usual, and then I realize Heidi is joining it. For a minute it doesn’t
compute. Then I realize why the company’s chief employment lawyer is
sitting there for my “performance review.”
It’s less of a savage attack on my career and more of a quick euthanasia.
Elliot and Heidi fire me in a perfunctory manner moments into the meeting.
Elliot doesn’t even look sheepish. My laptop is confiscated. I’m not allowed
back to my desk to retrieve the personal items that had built up over the
years at the company. I ask about a reference. I’m told that’s a question for
my manager. Joel. I ask to say goodbye to my team and beloved assistant
and I’m told no. Instead, I’m walked out of the building by a security guard.
Standing in the driveway in front of the building, waiting for a taxi to take
me home, I have an awkward conversation with the company’s chief
security officer, Alex Stamos, who has no idea why I’m standing there
stunned. He asks me if I’ve figured out a way to stop working on
Facebook’s entry into China. He knows my views on Facebook’s plans
there.
“You could say that, yes,” I tell him.
“Congratulations!” he exclaims, and my taxi pulls up.
I get in and the driver quickly pulls onto the Bayfront Expressway.
Through the rearview mirror I take one long last look at Facebook’s
gargantuan headquarters as we speed past the scrubby marshland
surrounding it and onto Highway 101.
I’m stunned by the firing. I saw the possibility, sure. But it’s all so
abrupt.
Mostly I’m scared about what comes next for me and my family.

48
Just Business
So that’s how it ended for me at Facebook. I faced the behavior so many
women at Facebook and other tech firms have faced. I wasn’t silent enough.
But if they hadn’t thrown me out, I wouldn’t have lasted much longer at the
company anyway. I had told myself I could do more on the inside than the
outside, but realistically, being the grit in the machine wasn’t working.
I think all the time about how the company looked to me before I joined.
All the possibility of it, the promise of connecting everyone in the world.
How I was so sure that Facebook would change the world for the better.
The Facebook I saw then has been corrupted.
In the early days, when I traveled anywhere in the world with Mark, people
would approach us and pour out heartfelt stories of how the platform
changed their lives; how they reconnected with someone who became their
husband or wife; how they made new, life-changing friendships; how it
helped them start their businesses; how they were all alone—immigrants to
a new country like me, gay kids in conservative towns, people with rare
diseases and no one to talk to about their care—and found community on
Facebook. It felt promising and vast, and sometimes actually historic.

Now I’m consumed by the worst of it. The grief and sorrow of it. How
Facebook is helping some of the worst people in the world do terrible
things. How it’s an astonishingly effective machine to turn people against
each other. And monitor people at a scale that was never possible before.
And manipulate them. It’s an incredibly valuable tool for the most
autocratic, oppressive regimes, because it gives them exactly what those
regimes need: direct access into what people are saying from the top to
bottom of society.
It really didn’t have to be this way. I can’t state that strongly enough. If I
had to sum up what seven years of watching the people running this
massive global enterprise taught me, it’s that something else was possible.
They really could have chosen to do it all differently and fix so much of
what’s been destructive about Facebook. At every juncture, there was an
opportunity to make different choices; China, Myanmar, elections, hate
speech, vulnerable teens. They could’ve made it right again. A different
path was possible. And in the long term, it would’ve been in their own self-
interest too. Facebook, the business, the brand, and the company, would be
better off. We all would be better off.
And my bosses seemed deeply and blindly unconcerned about any of
this. In fact, just the opposite. Turn after turn they encouraged it. In China,
they specifically built the software to order. In America, they put staff in
with the Trump campaign to help them stage the war of misinformation,
trolling, and lies that won him the election. And in Myanmar, they enabled
posts that led to horrific sexual violence and genocide. A lethal carelessness.
That’s what this company is, and I was part of it. I failed when I tried to
change it, and I carry that with me.
You’d hope that people who amass the kind of power Facebook has
would learn a sense of responsibility, but they don’t show any sign of
having done so. In fact I see the opposite. The more they see of the
consequences of their actions, the less of a fuck Mark and Facebook’s
leadership give. Instead of fixing these things, this ongoing suffering they
caused, they seem indifferent. They’re happy to get richer and they just

don’t care. It feels crude to put it that way, but it’s true. They profit from the
callous and odious things they do. Which seems so crazy. They could’ve
tried to fix these things and still been insanely rich and powerful. They were
in the rare situation where the money was there in abundance. They could
have afforded to do the right thing. They could have told the truth. They
could have exercised basic human decency. It was all within their power.
Instead, they focused on commencement speeches, vanity political
campaigns, vacation properties, raising artisanal Wagyu beef from
macadamia-eating cows, whatever their latest plaything was.
And it seemed that none of these choices, these decisions, these moral
compromises, felt particularly momentous to Facebook’s leadership.
They didn’t seem to lose sleep over any of it.
It’s simply what they did day-to-day.
Just business.

Epilogue
The next time I laid eyes on Joel was nearly a year later. Brett Kavanaugh’s
Supreme Court nomination hearing. Where Kavanaugh’s grilled by
Congress over allegations of sexual assault. Christine Blasey Ford’s
testifying when the TV camera pans out. Joel’s two rows behind
Kavanaugh; his wife, Laura, is in the front row. He’s there showing support
for Kavanaugh. On company time, of course. I wasn’t the only person
watching coverage of the hearing who noticed. This provoked something of
an outcry at Facebook among the rank and file. So, Joel apologized and said
he was grateful for the feedback from employees. And then the day after
this apology he and Laura threw a celebratory party for Kavanaugh at their
palatial home. Friends from Facebook got in touch to see how I was feeling.
Facebook’s lawyers got in touch to warn me to be silent. Joel’s still at
Facebook, now Meta. Promoted and even more powerful. Central to core
decisions like what to allow on Facebook in the lead-up to the January 6
riots or how Facebook should engage in the efforts to engineer a ban of
emerging rival TikTok. Running the largest lobbying effort by a public
company in the US. Mark’s chief consigliere in Washington, DC.
Elliot’s gone. He fell on his sword after reports emerged that Facebook had
hired a Republican opposition research firm, Definers, to covertly sway
public opinion against competitors, activists, and policy experts who have
spoken out about Facebook. Part of Facebook’s broader efforts to dig dirt
on people who criticize the company. They attacked George Soros,
smearing him with anti-Semitic conspiracy theories. It later emerged that,

despite denying any knowledge of dirty PR tactics and Elliot taking
responsibility, Sheryl Sandberg had been involved in Facebook’s efforts to
target Soros.
Sheryl’s gone too. For someone who built her profile leaning into her
career, it’s not clear what her next career step is or why she left. There were
reports that in the months before her departure in June 2022, she was facing
“internal scrutiny” for multiple things including her use of corporate
resources for personal projects such as her Lean In foundation and
Facebook employees’ work writing and promoting her book. The Wall
Street Journal characterized it as a “broader review of Ms Sandberg’s
personal use of Facebook’s resources over many years.” The allegations
under investigation also reportedly included Sheryl using Facebook
resources to kill a story about her then boyfriend Activision CEO Bobby
Kotick, which would have surfaced allegations of harassment (which
Kotick had always denied) and a temporary restraining order (lifted shortly
after it was made). Sheryl is now campaigning against the silence around
sexual assault following the October 7, 2023, attacks in Israel.
Mark? He’s done apologizing. Instead he’s wearing shirts with EITHER A
ZUCK OR NOTHING emblazoned across them in Latin, commissioning
sculptures of his wife “in the Roman tradition,” and vowing to fight Elon
Musk in a cage match. Beyond that, Mark’s main preoccupation has been
the metaverse, Facebook’s play in building and colonizing the next digital
frontier, augmented and virtual reality. Mark went all in on the metaverse,
so committed to it he changed the name of the company, spending tens of
billions of dollars on its creation. And now that is his brand. Which is
curious. The metaverse is looking more like Internet.org, or Facebook’s
efforts in hardware—the Facebook phone, the Facebook Portal, Building 8
—or Facebook’s crypto currency. Although building Facebook more than
two decades ago proved he could have the right idea at the right time, these

subsequent efforts (the ones where he builds rather than acquires based on
data from spyware) show he is also capable of the opposite.
No matter—like everyone else, he’s into AI and Facebook’s, now
Meta’s, stock is being carried along in the bubble.
And this matters. But I’ll come back to that.
As for me … Another baby. I know. The medical professionals were aghast.
Telling me “there’s no literature,” which wasn’t actually a sign to write this
book as I initially thought, but a way of letting me know that there is no
medical research on how to approach birth after an amniotic embolism. Or
as one doctor bluntly put it, “Everyone who has what you had is dead, and
if they’re not dead, there’s no way they’re having another baby.” Obviously,
this did not please Tom, who very selfishly was against me dying, as well as
decisions that might increase the likelihood of this, like a high-risk
pregnancy. And, like Zika, it made me feel like I was carrying a grenade
alongside my baby. The baby’s birth is another story. But now this baby is
here. And healthy. And has brought so much joy. Exhausting joy.
What else? After my friend and former Facebook coworker Ifeoma Ozoma
cowrote and cosponsored California’s Silenced No More Act, legislation
that protects employees who speak about harassment and discrimination
even if they’ve signed a nondisclosure agreement, I reached out. We worked
with advocacy organizations Open MIC and Whistle Stop Capital to run
shareholder resolutions on this issue at major tech companies including
Apple, Google, Amazon, Microsoft, and of course Facebook. They seek to
hold companies to account. I also advanced a shareholder resolution on
issues related to Facebook’s engagement with China over the last decade.
But it’s very difficult when the company has this much centralized power.
Mark has unassailable majority control through dual class share structure.
I also submitted an extensive whistleblower complaint to the Securities
and Exchange Commission. I believed that the government needed to know
the truth. That Congress, shareholders, employees, and all of us were lied

to. Another story. But, at the risk of leaving this story incomplete, one I
won’t go into here.
What else? Like the early days of Facebook, I’ve been drawn to AI, which
is wild with geopolitical and policy issues. And will be the next great clash
of technology and governments. Since the end of my time at Facebook, I’ve
thrown myself into working on different aspects of AI policy, but the one
where this clash was most apparent was between China and the United
States.
I began working on something called “the Track II Dialogue on Artificial
Intelligence (AI) in National Security Development and Application of
Artificial Intelligence-Enabled Military Systems.” The jargon disguises
something much more interesting: unofficial negotiations between the US
and China on AI weapons. Trying to answer some of the most fundamental
existential questions: Should a human be involved before nuclear weapons
are triggered? Should lethal or nonlethal AI weapons operate under human
oversight or control? or What rules need to be in place to avoid inadvertent
escalation with the use of AI enabled weapons systems in Warfare? All
questions humans have never had to deal with before.
And this is vital because the rapid rate of development of AI weapons
systems has outpaced any agreement on how they should be used. At the
same time as geopolitical tensions have ratcheted up.
Anyone who has worked closely with technology can tell you how
buggy it can be. How an innocuous snippet of code can break a robust
system. How technology can behave in ways that the humans in charge
could never expect. How technology can create unexpected harms.
That’s one thing when it’s a social media platform that serves over three
billion people. And quite another when it’s second-strike capability in the
South China Sea. That is, the automated ability to launch a devastating
nuclear retaliation after absorbing a disarming first strike.

We live in an era when intelligent weapons can autonomously identify
and kill human targets without human input.
Before this hot war, there is a cold battle over AI already being fought. At
the heart of it is whether closed AI models or the open-source model
pursued by Mark, Meta, and others is the best path for humanity.
There’s no question about what China would prefer; as Facebook’s
China team used to say, “The Chinese love open source.”
Some AI experts in the West see a closed model as critical. They believe
that an open model like Facebook’s will allow China to overtake US
dominance in AI. Sam Altman says, “China will force U.S. companies and
those of other nations to share user data, utilize AI to develop new ways of
spying on their own citizens or create next-generation cyberweapons to use
against other countries.”
Mark disagrees: “Some people argue that we must close our models to
prevent China from gaining access to them, but my view is that this will not
work and will only disadvantage the US and its allies. Our adversaries are
great at espionage, stealing models that fit on a thumb drive is relatively
easy, and ‘most tech companies are far from operating in a way that would
make this more difficult.’”
To work out the safe way forward, we need to understand the
relationship that Facebook actually has with China, its second-largest
source of revenue behind the US. To have an honest and open accounting of
what technology and what data they’ve already shared.
These are still the same careless people. They’ve changed the name of
the company from Facebook to Meta. But leopards don’t change their spots.
The DNA of the company remains the same. And the more power they
grasp, the less responsible they become. I experienced the first tentative
meetings between Mark and world leaders. And witnessed the exploration
and embrace of power that has continued to expand. Now Meta is one of the
world’s most powerful companies. The direction it sets continues. And now
we’re living in the world that has been shaped by these people and their
lethal carelessness.

To say nothing of the future. If we don’t address what has been covered
up, we’ll repeat Facebook’s mistakes.
This time the stakes are too high.

Acknowledgments
Thank you to the people who decided that this mattered to them and did
whatever it took to make it happen.
To Christy Fletcher, who skillfully navigated more than her fair share of
twists and turns, along with her UTA team of Claire Yoo, Melissa
Chinchillo, and Yona Levin. Thank you for your counsel and steadfast
support.
To Cathryn Summerhayes and the brilliant Curtis Brown team of Edina
Imrik, Georgie Mellor, Annabel White, and Katie Harrison.
To Megan Lynch, who had such conviction in this from the first word.
Her grit, ambition, and expertise made the impossible happen. Whatever the
publishing version of statecraft is, Megan and her Flatiron team of Marlena
Bittner, Malati Chavali, Kara McAndrew, Kate Keating, Morgan Mitchell,
Chris O’Connell, Tim Greco, Jennifer Edwards, John Edwards, Christine
Jaeger, Tom Stouras, Louis Grilli, Jon Yaged, and Deb Futter have perfected
it.
To Mike Harpley and the outstanding Macmillan team of Poppy North,
Kim Nyamhondera, Ríbh Brownlee, Lyndon Branfield, Stuart Dwyer, and
Joanna Prior.
To Professor David Runciman, who always advocated for the book even
when I didn’t. Thank you for the Tocqueville anecdote and your insight.
To my friends from Facebook, thank you for your decency during dark
times and beyond.
To Ifeoma Ozoma, for doing something about it.
To Catherine Nicol, so much of this grew from work stories I both loved
and hated telling you. And that continued throughout this process where

your trusted advice was essential. Thanks for being such a great friend
throughout it all.
To my friends and first readers Tamineh Dhondy, Dr. Katharine Smales,
Jamie Joseph, Rebecca Jenkin, Chloë Østmo, and Ruth Wynn-Williams,
both my life and this book are so much better because of you.
And, of course, to Tom and our three little pistols, thank you for
everything.

About the Author
Sarah Wynn-Williams is a former New Zealand diplomat and international
lawyer. She joined Facebook after pitching a job and ultimately became
director of global public policy. After leaving the company she has
continued to work on tech policy, including artificial intelligence.

 
Thank you for buying this
Flatiron Books ebook.
 
To receive special offers, bonus content,
and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.
 
Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup

Some names have been changed.
CARELESS PEOPLE. Copyright © 2025 by Sarah Wynn-Williams. All rights reserved.
For information, address Flatiron Books, 120 Broadway, New York, NY 10271.
www.flatironbooks.com
Cover design by Laywan Kwan
Cover art: illustration by James Annal; shark © Refox Photos / Shutterstock
The Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available upon request.
ISBN 978-1-250-39123-0 (hardcover)
ISBN 978-1-250-39124-7 (ebook)
eISBN 9781250391247
The publisher of this book does not authorize the use or reproduction of any part of
this book in any manner for the purpose of training artificial intelligence technologies
or systems. The publisher of this book expressly reserves this book from the Text and
Data Mining exception in accordance with Article 4(3) of the European Union Digital
Single Market Directive 2019/790.
Our ebooks may be purchased in bulk for promotional, educational, or business use.
Please contact your local bookseller or the Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales
Department at 1-800-221-7945, extension 5442, or by email at
MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.
First Edition: 2025

Contents
Title Page
Copyright Notice
Dedication
Epigraph
Prologue
1. Simpleminded Hope
2. Pitching the Revolution
3. This Is Going to Be Fun
4. Auf Wiedersehen to All That
5. The Little Red Book
6. What Do We Stand For?
7. Show Him a Good Time
8. Running Out of Road
9. Lady McNugget
10. Only Good News
11. Road Trip
12. The Body
13. Stockholm Syndrome

14. Five Settlers and One Billionaire in Catan
15. A Simple Request
16. Just Keep Driving
17. Going Down in a Blaze of Glory
18. Red Flag
19. PAC-Man
20. Slouching Toward Autocracy
21. Billionaire Time
22. Hunger Games for the 0.001 Percent
23. Making Sure This Thing Flies
24. California Time
25. Muppets and Monsignors
26. The Wicked Witch of the West
27. Street Fighter Tactics
28. Lean In and Lie Back
29. Citizen Sanchez
30. Poker Face
31. A Heartwarming Story
32. What to Not Expect When You’re Expecting
33. Do We Have to Go into This?
34. The Facebook Election
35. Angry at the Truth
36. Rosebud
37. Man of the People
38. Let Them Eat Cake
39. Facebook Feminist Fight Club
40. Greetings from Beijing
41. Our Chinese Partner
42. Respectfully, Senator
43. Move Fast and Break the Law
44. Emotional Targeting
45. A Fish Rots from the Head
46. Myanmar
47. It Really Didn’t Have to Be This Way
48. Just Business

